The American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases and the Infectious Diseases Society of America Present HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C Last Updated: December 19, 2023 www.hcvguidelines.org © 2014-2023 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases and the Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. Introduction Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Introduction NOTICE: Guidance for hepatitis C treatment in adults is changing constantly with the advent of new therapies and other developments. A static version of this guidance, such as printouts of this website material, booklets, slides, and other materials, may be outdated by the time you read this. We urge you to review this guidance on this website (www.hcvguidelines.org) for the latest recommendations. The landscape of treatment for hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection has evolved substantially since the introduction of highly effective HCV protease inhibitor therapies in 2011. The pace of change has increased rapidly as numerous new drugs with different mechanisms of action have become available over the past few years. To provide healthcare professionals with timely guidance as new therapies become available and are integrated into HCV regimens, the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD), developed a web-based process for the rapid formulation and dissemination of evidence-based, expert-developed recommendations for hepatitis C management. The AASLD/IDSA guidance on hepatitis C addresses management issues ranging from testing and linkage to care, the crucial first steps toward improving health outcomes for HCV-infected persons, to the optimal treatment regimen in particular patient situations. Recommendations are evidence based and rapidly updated as new data from peer-reviewed research become available. For each treatment option, recommendations reflect the best possible management for a given patient and a given point of disease progression. Recommendations are rated with regard to the level of the evidence and strength of the recommendation. The AASLD/IDSA guidance on hepatitis C is supported by the membership- based societies and not by pharmaceutical companies or other commercial interests. The governing boards of AASLD and IDSA have appointed an oversight committee of 4 co-chairs and selected panel members from the societies. This guidance should be considered a living document in that the recommendations are updated frequently as new information and treatments become available. This continually evolving report provides guidance on FDA-approved regimens. At times, it may also recommend off-label use of certain drugs or tests, or provide guidance for regimens not yet approved by the FDA. Readers should consult prescribing information and other resources for further information. In the future, treatment recommendations may be further guided by data from cost-effectiveness studies. Last update: November 6, 2019 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 1 Methods Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Methods The guidance was developed by a panel of HCV experts in the fields of hepatology and infectious diseases using an evidence-based review of information that is largely available to healthcare practitioners. The processes and detailed methods for developing the guidance are detailed in Methods Table 1. Recommendations are rated according to the strength of the recommendation and quality of the supporting evidence (see Methods Table 2) (AASLD-IDSA, 2015). Commonly used abbreviations are defined in Methods Table 3. The panel regularly reviews available data to determine whether a regimen should be classified as recommended, alternative, or not recommended for particular patient subgroups. Recommended regimens are those that are favored for most patients in a given subgroup based on optimal efficacy, favorable tolerability and toxicity profiles, treatment duration, and pill burden. Alternative regimens are those that are effective but, relative to recommended regimens, have potential disadvantages, limitations for use in certain patient populations, or less supporting data than recommended regimens. In certain circumstances, an alternative regimen may be optimal for a specific patient situation. Not recommended regimens are clearly inferior to recommended or alternative regimens due to factors such as lower efficacy, unfavorable tolerability and toxicity, longer treatment duration, and/or higher pill burden. Unless otherwise indicated, such regimens should not be administered to patients with HCV infection. Last update: November 6, 2019 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 1 Table 1. Summary of the Process and Methods for the Guidance Devel Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Table 1. Summary of the Process and Methods for the Guidance Development Topic Description Statement of need Increased awareness of the rising number of complications of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, the recent screening initiatives by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), and the rapid evolution of highly effective antiviral therapy for HCV infection have driven a need for timely guidance on how new developments change practice for healthcare professionals. Goal of the guidance The goal of the guidance is to provide up-to-date recommendations to healthcare practitioners on the optimal screening, management, and treatment for persons with HCV infection in the United States, considering the best available evidence. The guidance is updated regularly as new data, information, and tools and treatments become available. Panel members Panel members are chosen based on their expertise in the diagnosis, management, and treatment of HCV infection. Members from the fields of hepatology and infectious diseases are included, as well as HCV community representatives. Members are appointed by the sponsor societies after vetting by an appointed sponsor society committee. The panel chairs are appointed by the society boards, 2 each from the sponsor societies. All panel chairs and members serve as uncompensated volunteers for defined terms (2 to 3 years), which may be renewed based on panel needs. Conflict of interest management The panel was established with the goal of having no personal (ie, direct payment to the individual) financial conflicts of interest among its chairs and among fewer than half of its panel members. All potential panel members are asked to disclose any personal relationship(s) with pharmaceutical, biotechnology, medical device, or health-related companies or ventures that may result in financial benefit. Disclosures are obtained prior to the panel member appointments and for 1 year prior to the initiation of their work on the panel. Full transparency of potential financial conflicts is an important goal for the guidance that best ensures the credibility of the process and the recommendations. Individuals are also asked to disclose funding of HCV-related research activities to their institutional division, department, or practice group. Disclosures are reviewed by the HCV guidance chairs, who make assessments based on the conflict-of-interest policies of the sponsoring organizations (AASLD and IDSA). Personal and institutional financial relationships with commercial entities that have products in the field of hepatitis C are assessed. The following relationships are prohibited during membership on the guidance panel and are grounds for exclusion from the panel: HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 3 Table 1. Summary of the Process and Methods for the Guidance Devel Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Topic Description Employment with any commercial company with products in the field of hepatitis C An ownership interest in a commercial entity that produces hepatitis C products Participation in/payment for promotional or marketing activities sponsored by companies with HCV-related products including non-CME educational activities or speakers bureaus for audiences outside of the company Participation in any single-funder CME activity Participation on a marketing or medical affairs advisory board The following relationships or activities are reportable but do not merit exclusion: Commercial support of research that is paid to an organization or practice group Due to the rapidly evolving nature of the subject matter, having individuals with expertise in the particular clinical topic is crucial to developing the highest-quality and most- informed recommendations. To that end, research support from commercial entities is not considered grounds for panel exclusion (an unresolvable conflict) if the funding of the research was paid to the institution or practice group, as opposed to the individual. In the instance of someone conducting clinical research in a community practice, research funds to the group practice are acceptable. Participation on commercial company scientific advisory boards Participation in advisory boards, data safety monitoring boards, or in consultancies sponsored by the research arm of a company (eg, study design or data safety monitoring board) is considered a potential personal conflict that should be reported but is not considered a criterion for exclusion. CME honorarium earned in excess of $5000 (total per year, including travel costs) No need to report if total honorarium is less than $5000. The HCV guidance chairs achieved a majority of panel members with no personal financial interests. Panel members are asked to inform the group of any changes to their disclosure status and are given the opportunity to recuse themselves (or be recused) from the discussion where a perceived conflict of interest that cannot be resolved exists. Financial disclosures for each panel member can be accessed here. Intended audience Medical practitioners, especially those who provide care to or manage patients with hepatitis C, are the intended audience of the guidance. Sponsors, funding, and collaborating partner AASLD and IDSA are the sponsors of the guidance and provide ongoing financial support. Grant support was sought and obtained from CDC for the initial gathering and review of evidence related to hepatitis C screening and testing recommendations and interventions to implement HCV screening in clinical settings. Evidence identification and collection The guidance is developed using an evidence-based review of information that is largely available to healthcare practitioners. Data from the following sources are considered by panel members when making recommendations: research published in the peer-reviewed literature or HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 3 Table 1. Summary of the Process and Methods for the Guidance Devel Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Topic Description presented at major national or international scientific conferences; safety warnings from the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) or other regulatory agencies or from manufacturers; drug interaction data; prescribing information from FDA-approved products; and registration data for new products under FDA review. Press releases, unpublished reports, and personal communications are generally not considered. Literature searches are conducted regularly and before each major revision to ensure that the panel addresses all relevant published data. Medical subject headings and free text terms are combined to maximize retrieval of relevant citations from the PubMed, Scopus, EMBASE, and Web of Science databases. To be considered for inclusion, articles are required to have been published in English from 2010 to the present. Data from abstracts presented at national or international scientific conferences are also considered. Rating of the evidence and re commendations The guidance is presented in the form of recommendations. Each recommendation is rated in terms of the level of the evidence and strength of the recommendation using a modification of the scale adapted from the American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association Practice Guidelines (AHA, 2011); (Shiffman, 2003). A summary of the supporting (and conflicting) evidence follows each recommendation or set of recommendations. Data review and synthesis and preparation of r ecommendation s and supporting information Draft recommendations are developed by subgroups of the full panel with interest and expertise in particular sections of the guidance. Following development of supporting text and references, the sections are reviewed by the full panel and chairs. A penultimate draft is submitted to the AASLD and IDSA governing boards for final review and approval before posting online on the website, www.hcvguidelines.org. Subgroups of the panel meet regularly by conference call as needed to update recommendations and supporting evidence. Updates may be prompted by new publications or presentations at major national or international scientific conferences, new drug approvals (or new indications, dosing formulations, or frequency of dosing), new safety warnings, or other information that may have a substantial impact on the clinical care of patients. Updates and changes to the guidance are indicated by a notice of update posted on the home page. Abbreviations Commonly used abbreviations in the text are defined in Methods Table 3. Opportunity for comments Evidence-based comments may be submitted to the panel by email to stynes@aasld.org or by clicking on the “Submit” button on the site contact form. The panel considers evidence-based comments about the recommendations, ratings, and evidence summaries but should not be contacted for individual patient management questions. Last update: November 6, 2019 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 3 Table 2. Rating System Used to Rate Level of Evidence and Strength o Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Table 2. Rating System Used to Rate Level of Evidence and Strength of Recommendation Recommendations are based on scientific evidence and expert opinion. Each recommended statement includes a Roman numeral (I, II, or III) representing the level of the evidence that supports the recommendation and a letter (A, B, or C) representing the strength of the recommendation. Class I Evidence and/or general agreement that a given diagnostic evaluation, procedure, or treatment is beneficial, useful, and effective. II Conflicting evidence and/or a divergence of opinion about the usefulness and efficacy of a diagnostic evaluation, procedure, or treatment. IIa Weight of evidence and/or opinion is in favor of usefulness and efficacy. IIb Usefulness and efficacy are less well established by evidence and/or opinion. III Conditions for which there is evidence and/or general agreement that a diagnostic evaluation, procedure, or treatment is not useful and effective or if it in some cases may be harmful. Level A Data derived from multiple randomized clinical trials, meta-analyses, or equivalent. B Data derived from a single randomized trial, nonrandomized studies, or equivalent. C Consensus opinion of experts, case studies, or standard of care. Adapted from the American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association Practice Guidelines (AHA, 2011); (Shiffman, 2003). In some situations, such as for interferon-sparing HCV treatments, randomized clinical trials with an existing standard-of- care arm cannot ethically or practicably be conducted. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has suggested alternative study designs, including historical controls or immediate versus deferred placebo-controlled trials. For additional examples and definitions see FDA link: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatory Information/Guidances/ UCM225333.pdf. In those instances for which there was a single predetermined, FDA-approved equivalency established, panel members considered the evidence as equivalent to a randomized controlled trial for levels A or B. Last update: November 6, 2019 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 1 Table 3. Commonly Used Abbreviations Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Table 3. Commonly Used Abbreviations Abbreviation Definition and Notes ACA Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act AFP alpha-fetoprotein ALT alanine aminotransferase AMP average manufacturer price Anti-HCV HCV antibody APRI AST-to-platelet ratio index AST aspartate aminotransferase AUC area under the curve AWP average wholesale pricea BOC boceprevir CBC complete blood count CDC Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CEA cost-effectiveness analysis CTP Child-Turcotte-Pugh (see below) CYP cytochrome P450 DAA direct-acting antiviral eGFR estimated glomerular filtration rate ESRD end-stage renal disease FDA US Food and Drug Administration GFR glomerular filtration rate HBsAg hepatitis B virus surface antigen HBV hepatitis B virus HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 3 Table 3. Commonly Used Abbreviations Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Abbreviation Definition and Notes HCC hepatocellular carcinoma HCV hepatitis C virus Hepatitis C virus and HCV refer to the virus. Hepatitis C and HCV infection or HCV disease refer to the disease entity. ICER incremental cost-effectiveness ratio IDU injection drug use or user INR international normalized ratio MELD model for end-stage liver disease MSM men who have sex with men NASH nonalcoholic steatohepatitis NAT nucleic acid testing NIH National Institutes of Health NS3 HCV nonstructural protein 3 NS5A HCV nonstructural protein 5A OATP organic anion-transporting polypeptide PBM pharmacy benefit manager PCR polymerase chain reaction P-gp P-glycoprotein PreP preexposure prophylaxis PWID people who inject drugs QALY quality-adjusted life-year RAS resistance-associated substitution RBC red blood cell(s) RBV ribavirin RGT response-guided therapy sAg surface antigen SMV simeprevir SOF sofosbuvir HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 3 Table 3. Commonly Used Abbreviations Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Abbreviation Definition and Notes SVR12 (or 24 or 48, etc) sustained virologic response at 12 weeks (or at 24 weeks, or at 48 weeks, etc) TSH thyroid-stimulating hormone TVR telaprevir ULN upper limit of normal USPSTF US Preventive Services Task Force WAC wholesale acquisition costb a "List price" for wholesale pharmacies to purchase drugs b Typically, approximately 17% off of AWP Child-Turcotte-Pugh (CTP) Classification of the Severity of Cirrhosis CLASS A CLASS B CLASS C Total Points 5-6 7-9 10-15 Factor 1 Point 2 Points 3 Points Total bilirubin (µmol/L) <34 34-50 >50 Serum albumin (g/L) >35 28-35 <28 Prothrombin time / international normalized ratio <1.7 1.71-2.3 >2.3 Ascites None Mild Moderate to Severe Hepatic encephalopathy None Grade I-II (or supressed with medication) Grade III-IV (or refractory) Last update: November 6, 2019 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 3 Testing, Evaluation, and Monitoring of Hepatitis C Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Testing, Evaluation, and Monitoring of Hepatitis C The following pages address testing, evaluation, and monitoring of patients with HCV before, during and after antiviral therapy. HCV Testing and Linkage to Care When and in Whom to Initiate HCV Therapy Overview of Cost, Reimbursement, and Cost-Effectiveness Considerations for Hepatitis C Treatment Regimens Monitoring Patients Who Are Starting HCV Treatment, Are on Treatment, or Have Completed Therapy HCV Resistance Primer Last update: August 27, 2020 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 1 HCV Testing and Linkage to Care Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) HCV Testing and Linkage to Care One-Time Hepatitis C Testing Recommendations for One-Time Hepatitis C Testing RECOMMENDED RATING One-time, routine, opt out HCV testing is recommended for all individuals aged 18 years or older. I, B One-time HCV testing should be performed for all persons less than 18 years old with activities, exposures, or conditions or circumstances associated with an increased risk of HCV infection (see below). I, B Prenatal HCV testing as part of routine prenatal care is recommended with each pregnancy. I, B Periodic repeat HCV testing should be offered to all persons with activities, exposures, or conditions or circumstances associated with an increased risk of HCV exposure (see below). IIa, C Annual HCV testing is recommended for all persons who inject drugs, for HIV-infected men who have unprotected sex with men, and men who have sex with men taking pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP). IIa, C Risk Activities Injection drug use (current or ever, including those who injected only once) Intranasal illicit drug use Use of glass crack pipes Male engagement in sex with men Engagement in chem sex (defined as the intentional combining of sex with the use of particular nonprescription drugs in order to facilitate or enhance the sexual encounter [Bourne, 2015]) Risk Exposures Persons on long-term hemodialysis (ever) Persons with percutaneous/parenteral exposures in an unregulated setting Healthcare, emergency medical, and public safety workers after needlestick, sharps, or mucosal exposure to HCV-infected blood Children born to HCV-infected women Recipients of a prior transfusion or organ transplant, including persons who: Were notified that they received blood from a donor who later tested positive for HCV Received a transfusion of blood or blood components, or underwent an organ transplant before July 1992 Received clotting factor concentrates produced before 1987 Persons who were ever incarcerated HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 12 HCV Testing and Linkage to Care Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommendations for One-Time Hepatitis C Testing Other Conditions and Circumstances HIV or HBV infection Sexually active persons about to start pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) for HIV Chronic liver disease and/or chronic hepatitis, including unexplained elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels Solid organ donors (living and deceased) and solid organ transplant recipients Based on the 2013–2016 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) data among the general noninstitutionalized US population, an estimated 4.1 million people have had HCV exposure (HCV-antibody–positive), including 2.4 million with active HCV infection (HCV-RNA–positive) (Hofmeister, 2019). Total HCV burden in the US also includes those not accounted for in NHANES data—incarcerated, institutionalized, or unsheltered homeless persons—with estimates ranging from 380,000 to 800,000 additional HCV-antibody–positive persons (Hofmeister, 2019); (Edlin, 2015). Approximately 50% of all infected persons are unaware that they have HCV (Yehia, 2014); (Holmberg, 2013 ); (Denniston, 2012). HCV screening is recommended because of the known benefits of care and treatment in reducing the risk of decompensated cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma, and all-cause mortality, and the potential public health benefit of reducing transmission through early treatment, viral clearance, and reduced risk behaviors (Chou, 2020); (Owens, 2020); (Schillie, 2020); (Smith, 2012). HCV is primarily transmitted through percutaneous exposure to infected blood. Other modes of transmission include mother-to-infant and contaminated devices shared for noninjection drug use. Sexual transmission also occurs but is generally inefficient except among HIV-infected men who have unprotected sex with men (Pakianathan, 2018). Injection drug use (IDU) poses the greatest risk for HCV infection, accounting for at least 60% of acute HCV infections in the United States. Healthcare exposures are important sources of transmission, including: the receipt of blood products in the US prior to 1992 (after which routine screening of the blood supply was implemented); receipt of clotting factor concentrates in the US before 1987; receipt of blood or blood products in other countries (risk depends on country prevalence and screening practices); long-term hemodialysis; needlestick injuries among healthcare workers; and patient- to-patient transmission resulting from poor infection control practices. Other risk factors include having been born to an HCV-infected mother, incarceration, and percutaneous or parenteral exposures in an unregulated setting. Examples include tattoos received outside of licensed parlors and medical procedures performed internationally or domestically where strict infection control procedures may not have been followed (eg, surgery before implementation of universal precautions) (Hellard, 2004). The importance of these risk factors might differ based on geographic location and population (Schillie, 2020); (Owens, 2020). An estimated 12% to 39% of incarcerated persons in North America are HCV-antibody–positive, supporting the recommendation to test this population for HCV infection (Larney, 2013); (Allen, 2003); (Weinbaum, 2003). Because of shared transmission modes, persons with HIV infection are at risk for HCV. Annual HCV testing is recommended for sexually active HIV-infected adolescent and adult men who have sex with men. The presence of concomitant ulcerative sexually transmitted infections, proctitis related to sexually transmitted infections, or high-risk sexual or drug use practices may warrant more frequent testing. Sexual transmission is particularly a risk for HIV-infected men who have unprotected sex with men (Hosein, 2013); (van de Laar, 2010). Testing sexually active, non- HIV–infected persons for HCV and HBV infection before starting and while receiving pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) for HIV prevention should also be considered (Hoornenborg, 2020); (Volk, 2015). Data also support testing in all deceased and living solid organ donors and all recipients because of the risk of HCV infection posed to the recipient (Lai, 2013); (Jones, 2020). Although hepatitis C testing guidelines from the US Centers for HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 12 HCV Testing and Linkage to Care Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) do not specifically recommend testing immigrants from countries with a high HCV prevalence (eg, Egypt and Pakistan), such persons 18 years or older are included in the one-time, opt out HCV testing recommendation. CDC established risk-based HCV testing guidelines in 1998 (CDC, 1998). These guidelines were expanded in 2012 with a recommendation to offer one-time HCV testing to all persons born from 1945 through 1965 without prior ascertainment of HCV risk factors. This recommendation was supported by evidence demonstrating that persons in this age group had a 6-fold higher prevalence of HCV infection and that a risk-based strategy alone failed to identify >50% of HCV infections, due in part to patient underreporting of their risk and provider limitations in ascertaining risk factor information (Denniston, 2012). The USPSTF also recommended one-time HCV testing in asymptomatic persons belonging to the 1945 through 1965 birth cohort as well as other individuals based on exposures, behaviors, and conditions or circumstances that increase HCV infection risk. Since the birth cohort recommendation was adopted, however, there has been an increase in the number of acute and chronic HCV infections reported in individuals born after 1965 (Zibbell, 2018); (Ly, 2017); (Suryaprasad, 2014). The increase in HCV incidence and prevalence among a younger cohort results from the opioid epidemic and increased IDU. This shift in HCV epidemiology and the known failures of risk-based testing warranted an expansion of the recommendation. Accordingly, CDC updated screening recommendations in 2020 to include HCV screening at least once in a lifetime for all adults aged ≥18 years as well as HCV screening of all pregnant women during each pregnancy, except in settings where the prevalence of HCV infection (ie, HCV-RNA positivity) is <0.1%. Both recommendations were based on extensive literature review and estimates of the cost-effectiveness of screening. In their recommendation, CDC noted that no states have an estimated HCV-RNA prevalence <0.1% (Schillie, 2020). USPSTF also recently issued recommendations for one-time, routine, opt-out testing of adults aged 18 through 79 years (Owens, 2020). For the CDC 2020 testing guidelines, a systematic review included a harm assessment for HCV screening during pregnancy. This review was augmented by input from subject matter experts, studies not captured through the formal literature review, and the peer-review process. Despite several plausible harms (including insurability and employability issues, legal ramifications and potential loss of infant custody, unnecessary cesarean deliveries, and unnecessary avoidance of breastfeeding), CDC concluded that identified or potential harms did not outweigh the benefits of HCV screening (Schillie, 2020). Generally, routine HCV testing is cost-effective because of increasing HCV incidence and prevalence among people who inject drugs (PWID) and the decreasing cost of DAA therapy. Many patients at greatest risk for HCV infection and transmission do not readily report their highly stigmatized risk activities. Studies conducted in US urban emergency departments, for example, reveal that 15% to 25% of patients with previously unidentified HCV infection were born after 1965 and/or have no reported history of IDU and are, therefore, missed by even perfect implementation of risk-based testing guidance (Schechter-Perkins, 2018); (Hsieh, 2016); (Lyons, 2016). Reinfection among those actively using drugs is common, but because HCV testing is a low-cost intervention and therapy is both highly effective and cost-effective, routine testing provides good economic value (ie, cost-effectiveness) even when many people need to be tested and treated more than once during their lifetime. Several cost-effectiveness studies published since release of the birth cohort recommendations have demonstrated that routine, one-time HCV testing among all adults in the US would likely identify a substantial number of HCV cases that would otherwise be missed, and that doing so would be cost-effective. One research group employed simulation modeling to compare several versions of routine guidance, including routine testing for adults aged ≥40 years, ≥30 years, and ≥18 years. The investigators found that routine HCV testing for all adults ≥18 years was cost-effective compared to risk-based screening guidance, and potentially cost-saving compared to testing only those aged ≥30 years or ≥40 years (Barocas, 2018). The study further demonstrated that routine testing remained cost-effective unless HCV infection had no impact on healthcare utilization and no impact on quality of life. Another research team similarly found that routine HCV testing for all adults aged ≥18 years is likely cost-effective compared to risk-based screening guidance, provided the HCV prevalence among those born after 1965 is >0.07% (Eckman, 2019). Notably, these studies reached similar conclusions despite being conducted independently and employing different simulation modeling approaches. Further, a variety of studies have tested the cost-effectiveness of routine HCV testing in specific venues, including correctional settings (He, 2016), substance use treatment centers (Schackman, 2018); (Schackman, 2015), and federally qualified health centers (Assoumou, 2018). All of these studies demonstrated that routine HCV testing and treatment was cost-effective, even HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 12 HCV Testing and Linkage to Care Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) when linkage to HCV treatment after testing was poor and the rate of HCV reinfection among injection drug users was high. Analyses focusing on pregnant women have demonstrated similar findings. One analysis calculated an incremental cost- effectiveness ratio (ICER) of $2,826 per quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) gained for universal screening of pregnant women compared with risk-based screening at an HCV-RNA positivity prevalence of 0.73% (Chaillon, 2019). Although real-world data informing screening during each pregnancy are lacking, a modeled analysis suggested that hepatitis C screening during each pregnancy would be cost-effective. Using a hepatitis C prevalence of 0.38% among pregnant women, the analysis found that universal hepatitis C screening during the first trimester of each pregnancy compared with the practice of risk-based screening had an ICER of $41,000 per QALY gained (Tasillo, 2019). Universal screening reduced HCV-attributable mortality by 16% and increased the proportion of infants identified as HCV-exposed from 44% to 92%. ICER remained ≤ $100,000 per QALY gained if hepatitis C prevalence was higher than 0.16% (Schillie, 2020). Evidence regarding the frequency of HCV testing in persons at risk for ongoing exposures to the virus is lacking. Clinicians should, therefore, determine the periodicity of testing based on the risk of infection or reinfection. Because of the high incidence of HCV infection among PWID and HIV-infected men who have unprotected sex with men, HCV testing at least annually using an assay that detects HCV RNA (ie, a quantitative HCV-RNA test) if they have been previously exposed, is recommended among such individuals (Newsum, 2017); (Aberg, 2014); (Witt, 2013); (Bravo, 2012); (Linas, 2012); (Wandeler, 2012); (Williams, 2011). Implementation of clinical decision support tools or prompts for HCV testing in electronic health records could facilitate reminding clinicians of HCV testing when indicated (Hsu, 2013); (Litwin, 2012). Initial HCV Testing and Follow-Up Recommendations for Initial HCV Testing and Follow-Up RECOMMENDED RATING HCV-antibody testing with reflex HCV RNA polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing is recommended for initial HCV testing. I, A Among persons with a negative HCV-antibody test who were exposed to HCV within the prior 6 months, HCV-RNA or follow-up HCV-antibody testing 6 months or longer after exposure is recommended. HCV-RNA testing can also be considered for immunocompromised persons. I, C Among persons at risk of reinfection after previous spontaneous or treatment-related viral clearance, HCV-RNA testing is recommended because a positive HCV-antibody test is expected. I, C Quantitative HCV-RNA testing is recommended prior to initiation of antiviral therapy to document the baseline level of viremia (ie, baseline viral load). I, A HCV genotype testing may be considered for those in whom it may alter treatment recommendations. I, A Persons found to have a positive HCV-antibody test and negative results for HCV RNA by PCR should be informed that they do not have evidence of current (active) HCV infection but are not protected from reinfection. I, A All persons for whom HCV screening is recommended should initially be tested for HCV antibody (CDC, 2013); (Alter, 2003) using an assay approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). A list of current FDA-approved HCV HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 4 of 12 HCV Testing and Linkage to Care Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) screening assays can be found on the agency website. FDA-approved tests include laboratory-based assays and a point- of-care assay (ie, OraQuick™ HCV rapid antibody test [OraSure Technologies]) (Lee, 2011). The latter is an indirect immunoassay with a sensitivity and specificity similar to those of laboratory-based HCV-antibody assays. Point-of-care assays are valuable in the community setting and allow for sample collection with a finger stick rather than standard phlebotomy. If point-of-care assays are used, reporting of results to the medical record and health authorities should follow protocols used for laboratory-based HCV-antibody tests. When possible, positive point-of-care antibody tests should be followed-up with immediate HCV-RNA confirmatory testing rather than referring the patient to another provider or setting to have the test performed. A study evaluating the performance parameters of the OraQuick™ HCV rapid antibody point- of-care test showed that people with viremia have higher antibody levels (compared with nonviremic persons), leading to a more rapid positive test result. All 227 viremic individuals in the study (from both clinical and real-world testing cohorts) tested positive within 5 minutes (Smookler, 2020). Based on a sensitivity of 100% (95% CI, 98.4-100%) in this study, if the OraQuick™ HCV rapid antibody test is not showing a positive result by 5 minutes, it is highly unlikely the person has active infection. Additional validation would be valuable, however, utilizing this so-called 5-minute rule may be considered, particularly in populations unable to wait the recommended 20–40 minutes before reading the test, or in high-throughput testing scenarios. A positive HCV-antibody test indicates current (active) HCV infection (acute or chronic); past infection that has resolved; or a rare false positive (Pawlotsky, 2002). A test to detect HCV viremia is therefore necessary to confirm active HCV infection and guide clinical management, including initiation of HCV treatment. Many reference laboratories offer HCV- antibody testing that automatically reflexes to HCV-RNA PCR testing if the antibody test is positive. This should be considered the optimal testing approach in a clinical setting because it requires only a single blood draw without the need to bring people back to care for confirmatory testing, a major barrier in the continuum of care (Mera, 2016). HCV RNA point-of-care tests are also under evaluation (eg, Xpert® HCV viral load and Genedrive® HCV ID), which would allow for a rapid confirmation of viremia and immediate/same day treatment initiation. Point-of-care HCV-RNA tests are not yet FDA approved, as of this writing. Collection of dried blood spot (DBS) samples also allows for assessment of HCV antibodies and reflex HCV-RNA testing by testing spots sequentially. DBS samples can be collected using a finger stick rather than phlebotomy and can be transported without an intact cold chain, making it useful in rural areas and in people for whom phlebotomy may be a testing barrier (Lange, 2017). HCV-RNA testing should also be performed in persons with a negative HCV-antibody test who are either immunocompromised (eg, persons receiving chronic hemodialysis) (KDIGO, 2008) or might have been exposed to HCV within the last 6 months because these persons may be HCV-antibody negative. An HCV-RNA test is also needed to detect reinfection in HCV-antibody–positive persons after previous spontaneous or treatment-related viral clearance. Detection of HCV core antigen in the blood also indicates active HCV infection. Because the sensitivity of HCV core antigen testing is less than that of HCV-RNA testing, if an HCV core antigen test is used to assess viremia, antibody- positive samples that test negative for HCV core antigen should have a confirmatory HCV-RNA test to exclude a false negative core antigen result (van Tilborg, 2018). An FDA-approved quantitative or qualitative HCV-RNA test with a detection level of ≤25 IU/mL should be used to detect HCV RNA. Figure 1 shows the CDC-recommended HCV testing algorithm. Figure 1. CDC-Recommended Testing Sequence for Identifying Current HCV Infection HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 5 of 12 HCV Testing and Linkage to Care Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) a For persons who might have been exposed to HCV within the past 6 months, testing for HCV RNA or follow-up testing for HCV antibody should be performed. For persons who are immunocompromised, testing for HCV RNA should be performed. b To differentiate past, resolved HCV infection from biologic false positivity for HCV antibody, testing with another HCV- antibody assay can be considered. Repeat HCV-RNA testing if the person tested is suspected to have had HCV exposure within the past 6 months or has clinical evidence of HCV disease, or if there is concern regarding the handling or storage of the test specimen. Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC, 2013). HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 6 of 12 HCV Testing and Linkage to Care Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Persons who have a positive HCV-antibody test and negative results for HCV RNA by PCR should be informed that they do not have laboratory evidence of current HCV infection, although it is possible that they may have had a previous exposure. Additional HCV testing is typically unnecessary. The HCV-RNA test can be repeated when there is a high index of suspicion for recent infection or in patients with ongoing HCV infection risk. They should also be informed that despite the presence of antibodies, they are not protected from infection/reinfection. Clinicians (or patients) may seek additional testing to determine whether a positive HCV-antibody test represents a remote, resolved HCV infection or a false positive. For patients with no apparent risk for HCV infection, the likelihood of a false positive HCV-antibody test is related to the HCV prevalence in the tested population. False positive HCV-antibody tests most commonly occur in populations with a low prevalence of HCV infection (Alter, 2003). If further testing is desired to distinguish between a true positive vs biologic false positivity for HCV antibody, repeat testing may be performed using a different FDA-approved, HCV-antibody assay. A biologic false result should not occur with 2 different assays because they target different regions of the virus, making it highly unlikely that both would falsely detect a cross-reactive antigen (CDC, 2013); (Vermeersch, 2008). Prior to initiation of antiviral therapy, quantitative HCV-RNA testing should be used to determine the baseline level of viremia (ie, viral load), which may affect treatment duration with certain regimens. The degree of viral load decline after initiation of treatment is less predictive of sustained virologic response (SVR) in the era of direct-acting antiviral (DAA) therapy compared with previous interferon-based treatment (see Pretreatment and On-Treatment Monitoring). With the advent of pangenotypic HCV treatment regimens, HCV genotyping is no longer required prior to treatment initiation for all individuals. In those with evidence of cirrhosis and/or past unsuccessful HCV treatment, treatment regimens may differ by genotype and thus pretreatment genotyping is recommended (see Treatment-Naive and Treatment-Experienced sections). For noncirrhotic treatment-naive patients, although genotyping may impact the preferred treatment approach, it is not required if a pangenotypic regimen is used (see Simplified Treatment Algorithm). Counseling Persons With Active HCV Infection Recommendations for Counseling Persons With Active HCV Infection RECOMMENDED RATING Persons with current HCV infection should receive education and interventions aimed at reducing liver disease progression and preventing HCV transmission. IIa, B Abstinence from alcohol and, when appropriate, interventions to facilitate cessation of alcohol consumption should be advised for all persons with HCV infection. IIa, B Evaluation for other conditions that may accelerate liver fibrosis, including hepatitis B and HIV infections, is recommended for all persons with active HCV infection. IIb, B Evaluation for advanced hepatic fibrosis using noninvasive tests (serum panels, elastography) or liver biopsy, if required, is recommended for all persons with HCV infection to facilitate an appropriate decision regarding HCV treatment strategy, and to determine the need for initiating additional measures for cirrhosis management (eg, hepatocellular carcinoma screening) (see Monitoring section). I, A Vaccination against hepatitis A and hepatitis B is recommended for all susceptible persons with HCV infection. IIa, C HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 7 of 12 HCV Testing and Linkage to Care Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommendations for Counseling Persons With Active HCV Infection Vaccination against pneumococcal infection is recommended for all patients with cirrhosis. IIa, C All persons with HCV infection should be provided education about how to prevent HCV transmission to others. I, C In addition to receiving antiviral therapy, HCV-infected persons should be educated about how to prevent further liver damage. Most important is prevention of the potentially deleterious effects of alcohol. Numerous studies have found a strong association between excess alcohol use and the development or progression of liver fibrosis, and the development of hepatocellular carcinoma (Safdar, 2004); (Harris, 2001); (Bellentani, 1999); (Corrao, 1998); (Wiley, 1998); (Poynard, 1997); (Noda, 1996). Daily consumption of >50 g of alcohol has a high likelihood of worsening fibrosis. Some studies indicate that daily consumption of lesser amounts of alcohol also exerts a deleterious effect on the liver; these data, however, are controversial (Hagström, 2017); (Younossi, 2013b); (Westin, 2002). Persons who abuse alcohol and have alcohol dependence require treatment and consideration for referral to an addiction specialist. Hepatitis B virus (HBV) and HIV coinfection have been associated with a poorer HCV prognosis in cohort studies (Puoti, 2017b); (Kruse, 2014); (Thein, 2008a); (Zarski, 1998). Because of overlapping risk factors for these infections and benefits associated with their identification and treatment, HCV-infected persons should be tested for HIV antibody and hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), using standard screening assays (Moyer, 2013); (CDC, 2008). See USPSTF HIV screening recommendations and CDC hepatitis B screening recommendations for additional information. Persons who test positive for HBsAg require monitoring during HCV treatment because of HBV reactivation risk (Lee, 2018). Anti-HBV therapy may also be considered (see reactivation of HBV in the Monitoring section). Persons who test negative for HBsAg but positive for hepatitis B core antibodies (anti-HBc)—with or without hepatitis B surface antibodies (anti-HBs)—have resolved HBV infection in most cases; the risk of clinically significant HBV reactivation with HCV therapy is very low in this scenario and no further workup is required (Mücke, 2018). Patients should be counseled about how to reduce their risk of acquiring these infections; HBV vaccination is recommended when appropriate. Assessment of Liver Disease Severity The severity of liver disease associated with chronic HCV infection is a key factor in determining the initial and follow-up evaluation of patients. Noninvasive tests using serum biomarkers, elastography, or liver imaging allow for accurate diagnosis of cirrhosis in most individuals (see pretreatment workup in When and in Whom to Initiate HCV Therapy). Liver biopsy is rarely required but may be considered if other causes of liver disease are suspected. Noninvasive methods frequently used to estimate liver disease severity include: Liver-directed physical exam (normal in most patients) Routine blood tests (eg, ALT, AST, albumin, bilirubin, international normalized ratio [INR], and CBC with platelet count) Serum fibrosis marker panels Transient elastography Liver imaging (eg, ultrasound or CT scan) Simple calculations derived from routine blood tests—such as the serum AST-to-platelet ratio index (APRI) (Wai, 2003) and FIB-4 score (Sterling, 2006)—as well as assessment of liver surface nodularity and spleen size by liver ultrasound or other cross-sectional imaging modalities can help determine if patients with HCV have cirrhosis and associated portal hypertension. The presence of portal hypertension is associated with a greater likelihood of developing future hepatic complications in untreated patients (Chou, 2013); (Rockey, 2006). Elastography provides instant information regarding liver stiffness and can reliably distinguish patients with a high versus low likelihood of cirrhosis (Bonder, 2014); (Castera, HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 8 of 12 HCV Testing and Linkage to Care Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) 2012). A more detailed discussion regarding fibrosis assessment is found in the When and In Whom to Initiate Therapy section. Persons with known or suspected bridging fibrosis and cirrhosis are at increased risk for developing complications of advanced liver disease and require frequent follow-up. They should also avoid hepatotoxic drugs, such as excessive acetaminophen (>2 g/d) and certain herbal supplements. Nephrotoxic drugs, such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, should also be avoided. Ongoing imaging surveillance for liver cancer and gastroesophageal varices is recommended for these patients (Fontana, 2010); (Sangiovanni, 2006). Persons with cirrhosis are more susceptible to invasive pneumococcal infection (Marrie, 2011) and should receive pneumococcal vaccination (CDC, 2012). Exposure to infected blood is the primary mode of HCV transmission. HCV-infected persons must be informed of the precautions needed to avoid exposing others to infected blood. This is particularly important for PWID given that HCV transmission in this population primarily results from sharing needles and other contaminated drug injection equipment. Epidemics of acute HCV due to sexual transmission in HIV-infected men who have sex with men have also been described (Urbanus, 2009); (van de Laar, 2009); (Fierer, 2008). Table 1 outlines measures to avoid HCV transmission. HCV is not spread by sneezing, hugging, holding hands, coughing, or sharing eating utensils or drinking glasses, nor is it transmitted through food or water. Table 1.  Measures to Prevent HCV Transmission HCV-infected persons should be counseled to avoid sharing toothbrushes and dental or shaving equipment, and be cautioned to cover any bleeding wound to prevent the possibility of others coming into contact with their blood. Persons should be counseled about harm reduction related to illicit drug use, including offering medication for opioid use disorder, if appropriate, or referral to a substance use treatment program. Those who continue to inject drugs should be referred to local syringe services programs and counseled to (Platt, 2017): Avoid reusing or sharing syringes, needles, water, cotton, and other drug preparation equipment. Use new sterile syringes and filters, and disinfected cookers. Clean the injection site with a new alcohol swab. Dispose of syringes and needles after 1 use in a safe, puncture-proof container. Persons with HCV infection should be advised not to donate blood and to discuss HCV serostatus prior to donation of body organs, other tissue, or semen. Persons with HIV infection and those with multiple sexual partners or sexually transmitted infections should be encouraged to use barrier precautions to prevent sexual transmission. Other persons with HCV infection should be counseled that the risk of sexual transmission is low and may not warrant barrier protection. Household surfaces and implements contaminated with visible blood from an HCV-infected person should be cleaned using a dilution of 1 part household bleach to 9 parts water. Gloves should be worn when cleaning up blood spills. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 9 of 12 HCV Testing and Linkage to Care Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Linkage to Care Recommendation for Linkage to Care RECOMMENDED RATING All persons with active HCV infection should be linked to a healthcare provider who is knowledgeable in and prepared to provide comprehensive management. IIa, C Improved identification of active HCV infection and treatment advances will have limited impact on HCV-related morbidity and mortality without concomitant improvement in linkage to care. All patients with current HCV infection and a positive HCV-RNA test should be evaluated by a healthcare provider with expertise in assessment of liver disease severity and HCV treatment. Subspecialty care and consultation may be required for persons with HCV infection who have advanced fibrosis or cirrhosis (Metavir stage ≥F3), including possible referral for consideration of liver transplantation in those with evidence of hepatic decompensation. Data do not support exclusion of HCV-infected persons from consideration for hepatitis C therapy based on alcohol intake or use of illicit drugs (see Identification and Management of HCV in People Who Inject Drugs). Some possible strategies to address HCV treatment barriers are listed in Table 2. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 10 of 12 HCV Testing and Linkage to Care Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Table 2. Common Barriers to and Misconceptions Regarding HCV Treatment and Potential Strategies Barrier Strategy Comorbid conditions (eg, substance use, psychiatric disorders, uncontrolled chronic medical conditions) Conduct counseling and education. Refer for services (eg, mental health services, medications for opioid use disorder [MOUDs], and syringe service programs). Co-localize services (eg, primary care, medical homes, syringe services programs and drug treatment, especially MOUD). Competing priorities and loss to follow-up Conduct counseling and education. Engage case managers and patient navigators. Consider other strategies such as incentives, peer navigators, and transportation assistance. Co-localize services (eg, primary care, medical homes, syringe services programs and drug treatment, especially MOUD). Treatment adherence and adverse effects Conduct counseling and education. Consider other strategies like incentives, peer navigators, and transportation assistance. Utilize directly observed therapy. Lack of access to treatment (eg, out-of-pocket costs, high copays, lack of insurance, geographic distance, and/or lack of specialist availability) Leverage expansion of coverage through the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Participate in models of care involving close collaboration between primary care clinicians and specialists. Liaise with pharmaceutical patient assistance programs and copay assistance programs. Co-localize services (eg, primary care, medical homes, syringe services programs and drug treatment, especially MOUD). Lack of practitioner expertise Collaborate with specialists (eg, project ECHO- like models and telemedicine). Use simplified HCV treatment guidelines {Develop electronic health record performance measures (e.g., care cascades) and clinical decision support tools (eg, pop-up reminders and standing orders). Co-localization of HCV screening, evaluation, and treatment with other medical or social services (ie, integrated care) is a strategy that addresses several treatment barriers. Co-localization has already been applied to settings with high HCV prevalence (eg, correctional facilities, needle exchange programs, substance abuse treatment centers, and harm reduction programs), but this type of care is not uniformly available (Burton, 2019); (Harrison, 2019); (Morey, 2019); (Schulkind, 2019); (Bruggmann, 2013); (Islam, 2012); (Stein, 2012). A recent study demonstrated that integrated care—consisting of multidisciplinary care coordination and patient case management—increased the proportion of patients with HCV infection and psychiatric illness or substance use who begin antiviral therapy and achieve SVR without serious adverse events (Ho, 2015). HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 11 of 12 HCV Testing and Linkage to Care Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) A strategy that addresses lack of access to specialists—a primary barrier to HCV care—is participation in models involving close collaboration between primary care practitioners and subspecialists (Beste, 2017b); (Rossaro, 2013); (Miller, 2012); (Arora, 2011). Such collaborations have used telemedicine and knowledge networks to overcome geographic distances to specialists (Rossaro, 2013); (Arora, 2011) or the availability of experienced providers in a methadone or correctional setting (Morey, 2019); (Talal, 2019). For example, project ECHO (Extension for Community Healthcare Outcomes) uses videoconferencing to enhance primary care practitioner capacity in rendering HCV care and treatment to New Mexico's large rural and underserved population (Arora, 2011). Through case-based learning and real- time feedback from a multidisciplinary team of specialists (gastroenterology, infectious disease, pharmacology, and psychiatry practitioners), project ECHO has expanded HCV treatment access in populations that might have otherwise remained untreated. The short duration of treatment and few serious adverse events associated with DAA therapy present an opportunity to expand the number of primary care providers engaged in HCV management and treatment. This expansion will support the goal of HCV elimination and overcome barriers associated with the need for subspecialty referrals. The ASCEND trial utilized a real-world cohort of patients at urban federally qualified health centers and found that HCV treatment administered by nonspecialist providers was as safe and effective as that provided by specialists (Kattakuzhy, 2017). Additional strategies for enhancing linkage to and retention in care could be adapted from other fields, such as tuberculosis and HIV. For example, use of directly observed therapy has enhanced adherence to tuberculosis treatment, and use of case managers and patient navigators has reduced loss of follow-up in HIV care (Govindasamy, 2012). Recent HCV testing and care programs have identified the use of patient navigators or care coordinators as important interventions in overcoming challenges associated with linkage to and retention in care (Ford, 2018); (Coyle, 2015); (Trooskin, 2015). There are also data suggesting that financial incentives and peer navigation may be useful to support treatment adherence in patients with substance use disorders (Ward, 2019); (Wohl, 2017). Ongoing assessment of efficacy and comparative effectiveness of this and additional strategies is a crucial area of future research for patients with HCV infection. Replication and expansion of best practices and new models for linkage to HCV care will also be crucial to maximize the public health impact of newer treatment paradigms. Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 12 of 12 When and in Whom to Initiate HCV Therapy Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) When and in Whom to Initiate HCV Therapy Successful hepatitis C treatment results in sustained virologic response (SVR), which is tantamount to virologic cure and, as such, is expected to benefit nearly all chronically infected persons. When the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the first interferon-sparing treatment for HCV infection, many patients who had previously been “warehoused” sought treatment. The infrastructure (ie, experienced practitioners, budgeted healthcare dollars, etc) did not yet exist to treat all patients immediately. Thus, the panel offered guidance for prioritizing treatment first for those with the greatest need. Since that time, there have been opportunities to treat many of the highest-risk patients and accumulate real-world experience regarding the tolerability and safety of interferon-free HCV regimens. More importantly, from a medical standpoint, data continue to accumulate that demonstrate the many benefits, both intrahepatic and extrahepatic, that accompany HCV eradication. Therefore, the panel continues to recommend treatment for all patients with chronic HCV infection, except those with a short life expectancy that cannot be remediated by HCV treatment, liver transplantation, or another directed therapy. Accordingly, prioritization tables have been removed from this section. Despite the strong recommendation for treatment of nearly all HCV-infected patients, pretreatment assessment of a patient’s understanding of treatment goals and provision of education about adherence and follow-up are essential. A well- established therapeutic relationship between clinician and patient remains crucial for optimal outcomes with direct-acting antiviral (DAA) therapies. Additionally, in certain settings there remain factors that impact access to medications and the ability to deliver them to patients. The descriptions of unique populations discussed in this section may help physicians make more informed treatment decisions for these groups. For additional information, see unique patient populations: Patients With HIV/HCV Coinfection; Patients With Decompensated Cirrhosis; Patients Who Develop Recurrent HCV Infection Post Liver Transplantation; Treatment of HCV-Uninfected Transplant Recipients Receiving Organs From HCV- Viremic Donors; Patients With Renal Impairment; HCV During Pregnancy; HCV in Children; Acute HCV Infection; and HCV Post Kidney Transplant. Goal of Treatment RECOMMENDED RATING The goal of treatment of HCV-infected persons is to reduce all-cause mortality and liver-related health adverse consequences, including end-stage liver disease and hepatocellular carcinoma, by the achievement of virologic cure as evidenced by a sustained virologic response. I, A Recommendation for When and in Whom to Initiate Treatment RECOMMENDED RATING Treatment is recommended for all patients with acute or chronic HCV infection, except those with a short life expectancy that cannot be remediated by HCV therapy, liver transplantation, or another directed therapy. Patients with a short life expectancy owing to liver disease should be managed in consultation with an expert. I, A HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 11 When and in Whom to Initiate HCV Therapy Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Clinical Benefit of Cure The proximate goal of HCV therapy is SVR (virologic cure), defined as the continued absence of detectable HCV RNA for at least 12 weeks after completion of therapy. SVR is a marker for cure of HCV infection and has been shown to be durable in large prospective studies in more than 99% of patients followed-up for ≥5 years (Manns, 2013); (Swain, 2010). While follow-up studies after cure using DAAs are limited, durability of SVR appears to be just as high (Reddy, 2018); (Sarrazin, 2017). Patients in whom SVR is achieved have HCV antibodies but no longer have detectable HCV RNA in serum, liver tissue, or mononuclear cells, and achieve substantial improvement in liver histology (Coppola, 2013); (Garcia-Bengoechea, 1999) (Marcellin, 1997). Assessment of viral response, including documentation of SVR, requires use of an FDA-approved quantitative or qualitative nucleic acid test (NAT) with a detection level of ≤25 IU/mL. Patients who are cured of their HCV infection experience numerous health benefits, including a decrease in liver inflammation as reflected by improved aminotransferase levels (ie, alanine aminotransferase [ALT] and aspartate aminotransferase [AST]), and a reduction in the rate of liver fibrosis progression (Poynard, 2002b). Among 3,010 treatment-naive patients from 4 randomized trials who had pretreatment and post-treatment liver biopsies (separated by a mean of 20 months) and were treated with 10 different interferon-based regimens, 39% to 73% of participants who achieved SVR had improvement in liver fibrosis and necrosis (Poynard, 2002b). Additionally, cirrhosis resolved in 49% of the cases. Portal hypertension, splenomegaly, and other clinical manifestations of advanced liver disease also improved. Among HCV-infected persons, SVR is associated with a >70% reduction in the risk of liver cancer (hepatocellular carcinoma [HCC]), and a 90% reduction in the risk of liver-related mortality and liver transplantation (Morgan, 2013); (van der Meer, 2012); (Veldt, 2007). Cure of HCV infection also reduces symptoms and mortality from severe extrahepatic manifestations, including cryoglobulinemic vasculitis, a condition affecting 10% to 15% of HCV-infected patients (Sise, 2016); (Fabrizi, 2013); (Landau, 2010). HCV-infected persons with non-Hodgkin lymphoma and other lymphoproliferative disorders achieve complete or partial remission in up to 75% of cases following successful therapy for HCV infection (Takahashi, 2012); (Gisbert, 2005); (Svoboda, 2005); (Hermine, 2002); (Mazzaro, 2002). These reductions in disease severity contribute to dramatic reductions in all-cause mortality (van der Meer, 2012); (Backus, 2011). Furthermore, patients who achieve SVR have a substantially improved quality of life, which spans their physical, emotional, and social health (Gerber, 2016); (Boscarino, 2015); (Younossi, 2014b); (Neary, 1999). Conversely, patients who do not achieve SVR after treatment have a continued worsening in health-related quality of life (Younossi, 2019). Despite convincing data from observational studies demonstrating the benefit of SVR on all-cause and liver-related mortality, the lack of randomized, placebo-controlled trials of HCV DAA treatment focusing on clinical endpoints (eg, mortality, HCC, liver decompensation, etc) and reliance on surrogate endpoints (eg, HCV RNA) have led some to question the benefits of HCV treatment. In further support of the dramatic benefit of HCV cure, a French cohort study that prospectively followed almost 10,000 patients with chronic HCV infection (including 2,500 who remained untreated for HCV) for a median of 33 months demonstrated a 52% reduction in all-cause mortality and a 34% reduction in HCC (Carrat, 2019). Because of the many benefits associated with successful HCV treatment, clinicians should treat HCV-infected patients with antiviral therapy with the goal of achieving SVR, preferably early in the course of chronic hepatitis C before the development of severe liver disease and other complications. Benefits of Treatment at Early Fibrosis Stages (Metavir Stage Less Than F2) Initiating therapy in patients with lower-stage fibrosis augments the benefits of SVR. In a long-term follow-up study, 820 patients with biopsy-confirmed Metavir stage F0 or F1 fibrosis were followed for up to 20 years (Jezequel, 2015). The 15-year survival rate was significantly better for those who experienced SVR than for those whose treatment failed or those who remained untreated (93%, 82%, and 88%, respectively; P =.003). The study results argue for consideration of earlier initiation of treatment. Several modeling studies also suggest a greater mortality benefit if treatment is initiated at fibrosis stages prior to F3 (Matsuda, 2016); (Zahnd, 2015); (Øvrehus, 2015). HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 11 When and in Whom to Initiate HCV Therapy Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Treatment delay may decrease the benefit of SVR. In a report from France, 820 patients with biopsy-confirmed Metavir stage F0 or F1 fibrosis were followed for as long as 20 years (Jezequel, 2015). The authors noted rapid progression of fibrosis in 15% of patients during follow-up, and in patients treated successfully, long-term survival was better. Specifically, at 15 years, survival rate was 92% for those with SVR versus 82% for treatment failures and 88% for those not treated. In a Danish regional registry study, investigators modeled treatment approaches with the aim of evaluating the benefit to the region in terms of reductions in morbidity and mortality and HCV prevalence (Øvrehus, 2015). Although they note that in their situation of low HCV prevalence (0.4%) with approximately 50% undiagnosed, a policy that restricts treatment to those with Metavir fibrosis stage F3 or higher would decrease mortality from HCC and cirrhosis, the number needed to treat to halve the prevalence of the disease is lower if all eligible patients receive treatment at diagnosis. A modeling study based on the Swiss HIV cohort study also demonstrated that waiting to treat HCV infection until Metavir fibrosis stages F3 and F4 resulted in 2- and 5-times higher rates of liver-related mortality, respectively, compared with treating at Metavir stage F2 (Zahnd, 2015). A US Veterans Administration dataset analysis that used very limited endpoints of virologic response dating from the interferon-treatment era suggested that early initiation of therapy (at a fibrosis-4 [FIB-4] score of <3.25) increased the benefit attained with respect to likelihood of treatment success and mortality reduction, and ultimately decreased the number of patients needed to treat to preserve 1 life by almost 50% (Matsuda, 2016). Considerations in Specific Populations Despite the recommendation for treatment of nearly all patients with HCV infection, it remains important for clinicians to understand patient- and disease-related factors that place individuals at risk for HCV-related complications (liver and extrahepatic) as well as for HCV transmission. Although these groups are no longer singled out for high prioritization for treatment, it is nonetheless important that clinicians recognize the unique dimensions of HCV disease and its natural history in these populations. The discussions offered below may assist clinicians in making compelling cases for insurance coverage of treatment when necessary. Persons With Advanced Liver Disease For persons with advanced liver disease (Metavir stage F3 or F4), the risk of developing complications of liver disease, such as hepatic decompensation (Child-Turcotte-Pugh [CTP] class B or C [Methods Table 3] ) or HCC, is substantial and may occur in a relatively short timeframe. A large prospective study of patients with cirrhosis resulting from HCV infection examined the risk of decompensation—including HCC, ascites, jaundice, bleeding, and encephalopathy—and found that the overall annual incidence rate was 3.9% (Sangiovanni, 2006). The National Institutes of Health (NIH)-sponsored HALT–C study included a group of 220 patients with HCV-related cirrhosis who were observed for approximately 8 years. A primary outcome of death, hepatic decompensation, HCC, or an increase in CTP score ≥2 occurred at a rate of 7.5% per year (Di Bisceglie, 2008); (Everson, 2006). Patients with a CTP score of ≥7 experienced a death rate of 10% per year. Numerous studies have demonstrated that hepatitis C therapy and the achievement of SVR in this population results in dramatic decreases in hepatic decompensation events, HCC, and liver-related mortality (Mira, 2013); (Morgan, 2013); (van der Meer, 2012); (Backus, 2011); (Dienstag, 2011); (Berenguer, 2009). In the HALT-C study, patients with advanced fibrosis secondary to HCV infection who achieved SVR, compared with patients with similarly advanced liver fibrosis who did not achieve SVR, had a decreased need for liver transplantation (HR, 0.17; 95% CI, 0.06-0.46), decreased development of liver-related morbidity and mortality (HR, 0.15; 95% CI, 0.06-0.38), and decreased HCC (HR, 0.19; 95% CI, 0.04-0.80) (Dienstag, 2011). Importantly, persons with advanced liver disease also require long-term follow-up and HCC surveillance regardless of treatment outcome (see Monitoring Patients Who Are Starting Hepatitis C Treatment, Are on Treatment, or Have Completed Therapy). Given the clinical complexity and need for close monitoring, patients with advanced liver disease that has already decompensated (CTP class B or C [Methods Table 3] ) should be treated by physicians with experience treating HCV in conjunction with a liver transplantation center, if possible (see Patients with Decompensated Cirrhosis). HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 11 When and in Whom to Initiate HCV Therapy Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Persons Who Have Undergone Liver Transplantation In HCV-infected individuals, HCV infection of the liver allograft occurs universally in those with viremia at the time of transplantation. Histologic features of hepatitis develop in about 75% of recipients within the first 6 months following liver transplantation (Neumann, 2004). By the fifth postoperative year, up to 30% of untreated patients have progressed to cirrhosis (Neumann, 2004); (Charlton, 1998). A small proportion of patients (4% to 7%) develop an accelerated course of liver injury (cholestatic hepatitis C, associated with very high levels of viremia) with subsequent rapid allograft failure. Recurrence of HCV infection post transplantation is associated with decreased graft survival for recipients with HCV infection compared to recipients who undergo liver transplantation for other indications (Forman, 2002). Effective HCV therapy prior to transplantation resulting in SVR (virologic cure) prevents HCV recurrence post transplantation (Everson, 2003). In addition, complete HCV viral suppression prior to transplantation prevents recurrent HCV infection of the graft in the majority of cases (Everson, 2005); (Forns, 2004). Preliminary data from a study of patients with complications of cirrhosis secondary to HCV infection who were wait-listed for liver transplantation (included patients with MELD scores up to 14 and CTP scores up to 8) found that treatment with sofosbuvir and weight-based ribavirin for up to 48 weeks was well tolerated and associated with an overall SVR of 70% post transplant (Curry, 2015). Post-transplant SVR was nearly universal among patients who had undetectable HCV RNA for 28 days or longer prior to transplantation. Treatment of established HCV infection post transplantation also yields substantial improvements in patient and graft survival (Berenguer, 2008); (Picciotto, 2007). The availability of effective, interferon-free antiviral therapy has addressed the major hurdles to treating HCV recurrence post transplantation—poor tolerability and efficacy. A multicenter, open-label study evaluated the efficacy of sofosbuvir plus ribavirin to induce virologic suppression in 40 patients after liver transplantation with compensated recurrence of HCV infection. Daily sofosbuvir plus ribavirin for 24 weeks achieved SVR12 in 70% of these patients (Charlton, 2015). No deaths, graft losses, or episodes of rejection occurred. Six patients had serious adverse events, all of which were considered unrelated to the study treatment. There were no drug interactions reported between sofosbuvir and any of the concomitant immunosuppressive agents. In contrast, treatment with sofosbuvir plus ribavirin, with or without peginterferon, in 64 patients with severe, decompensated cirrhosis resulting from recurrence of HCV infection following liver transplantation was associated with an overall SVR12 of 59% and a mortality rate of 13% (Forns, 2015). On an intent-to-treat basis, treatment was associated with clinical improvement in 57% and stable disease in 22% of patients. Given the clinical complexity (including drug-drug interactions and the need for close monitoring), patients with a liver transplant should be treated by physicians with experience in treating this population (see Patients Who Develop Recurrent HCV Infection Post Liver Transplantation). Persons at Increased Risk for Rapidly Progressive Fibrosis and Cirrhosis Fibrosis progression is variable across different patient populations as well as within the same individual over time. Many of the components that determine fibrosis progression and development of cirrhosis in an individual are unknown. However, certain factors, such as coinfection with HIV or the hepatitis B virus (HBV) and prevalent coexistent liver diseases (eg, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis [NASH]), are well recognized contributors to accelerated fibrosis progression (see Table below). HIV/HCV Coinfection HIV coinfection accelerates fibrosis progression among HCV-infected persons (Konerman, 2014); (Macias, 2009); (Benhamou, 1999), although control of HIV replication and restoration of the CD4 cell count may mitigate this to some extent but the effect is not completely reversed (Lo Re, 2014); (Bräu, 2006); (Benhamou, 2001). Thus, antiretroviral therapy is not a substitute for HCV treatment. In the largest paired-biopsy study, 282 HIV/HCV-coinfected patients with 435 paired biopsies were prospectively evaluated (Konerman, 2014). Thirty-four percent of patients showed fibrosis progression of at least 1 Metavir stage at a median of 2.5 years. Importantly, 45% of patients with no fibrosis on initial biopsy had progression. Finally, a more rapid progression to death following decompensation combined with lack of widespread access to liver transplantation and poor outcomes following transplantation highlight the need for HCV treatment in this population regardless of current fibrosis stage (see Patients with HIV/HCV Coinfection) (Terrault, 2012); (Merchante, 2006); (Pineda, 2005). HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 4 of 11 When and in Whom to Initiate HCV Therapy Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) HBV/HCV Coinfection The prevalence of HBV/HCV coinfection is estimated at 1.4% in the United States and 5% to 10% globally (Tyson, 2013); (Chu, 2008). Persons with HBV/HCV coinfection and detectable viremia of both viruses are at increased risk for disease progression, decompensated liver disease, and the development of HCC. HBV/HCV-coinfected individuals are susceptible to a process called viral interference wherein one virus may interfere with the replication of the other virus. Thus, when treating one or both viruses with antiviral drugs, periodic retesting of HBV DNA and HCV RNA levels during and after therapy is prudent, particularly if only one of the viruses is being treated at a time. Treatment of HCV infection in such cases utilizes the same genotype-specific regimens as are recommended for HCV monoinfection (see Initial Treatment of HCV Infection). HBV infection in such cases should be treated as recommended for HBV monoinfection (Lok, 2009). Other Coexistent Liver Diseases Persons with other chronic liver diseases who have coincident chronic HCV infection should be considered for HCV therapy given the potential for rapid liver disease progression. An interferon-free regimen is preferred for immune- mediated liver diseases, such as autoimmune hepatitis, because of the potential for interferon-related exacerbation. Persons With Extrahepatic Manifestations of Chronic HCV Infection Cryoglobulinemia Chronic hepatitis C is associated with a syndrome of cryoglobulinemia, an immune complex and lymphoproliferative disorder that leads to arthralgia, fatigue, palpable purpura, renal disease (eg, membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis), neurologic disease (eg, peripheral neuropathy, central nervous system vasculitis), and reduced complement levels (Agnello, 1992). Glomerular disease results from deposition of HCV-related immune complexes in the glomeruli (Johnson, 1993). Because patients with chronic hepatitis C frequently have laboratory evidence of cryoglobulins (>50% in some series), antiviral treatment is imperative for those with the syndrome of cryoglobulinemia and symptoms or objective evidence of end-organ manifestations. Limited data with DAA therapy in the setting of vasculitis end-organ disease related to cyroglobulinemia have demonstrated responses in 20% to 90% of patients (Comarmond, 2017); (Emery, 2017). Despite this, patients with severe end-organ disease may still require treatment with plasmapheresis or rituximab (Emery, 2017). Diabetes The relationship between chronic hepatitis C and diabetes (most notably type 2 diabetes and insulin resistance) is complex and incompletely understood. The prevalence and incidence of diabetes is increased in the context of hepatitis C (White, 2008). In the United States, type 2 diabetes occurs more frequently in HCV-infected patients, with a >3-fold greater risk in persons older than 40 years (Mehta, 2000). The positive correlation between plasma HCV RNA load and established markers of insulin resistance confirms this relationship (Yoneda, 2007). Insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes are independent predictors of accelerated liver fibrosis progression (Petta, 2008). Patients with type 2 diabetes and insulin resistance are also at increased risk for HCC (Hung, 2010). Successful antiviral treatment has been associated with improved markers of insulin resistance and a greatly reduced incidence of new-onset type 2 diabetes and insulin resistance in HCV-infected patients (Arase, 2009). Most recently, HCV antiviral therapy has been shown to improve clinical outcomes related to diabetes. In a large prospective cohort from Taiwan, the incidence rates of end-stage renal disease, ischemic stroke, and acute coronary syndrome were greatly reduced in HCV-infected patients with diabetes who received antiviral therapy compared to untreated, matched controls (Hsu, 2014). Therefore, antiviral therapy may prevent progression to diabetes in HCV-infected patients with prediabetes, and may reduce renal and cardiovascular complications in HCV-infected patients with established diabetes. Fatigue Fatigue is the most frequently reported symptom in patients with chronic hepatitis C, and has a major effect on quality of HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 5 of 11 When and in Whom to Initiate HCV Therapy Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) life and activity level as evidenced by numerous measures of impaired quality of life (Foster, 1998). The presence and severity of fatigue appears to correlate poorly with disease activity, although it may be more common and severe in HCV- infected individuals with cirrhosis (Poynard, 2002a). Despite difficulties in separating fatigue symptoms associated with hepatitis C from those associated with other concurrent conditions (eg, anemia, depression), numerous studies have reported a reduction in fatigue after cure of HCV infection (Bonkovsky, 2007). In the Virahep-C study, 401 patients with HCV infection were evaluated for fatigue prior to and after treatment, using validated scales to assess the presence and severity of fatigue (Sarkar, 2012). At baseline, 52% of patients reported having fatigue, which was more frequent and severe in patients with cirrhosis than in those without cirrhosis. Achieving SVR was associated with a substantial decrease in the frequency and severity of fatigue. A recent analysis of 413 patients from the NEUTRINO and FUSION trials who were treated with a sofosbuvir-containing regimen and achieved SVR12 demonstrated improvement in patient fatigue (present in 12%) from the pretreatment level (Younossi, 2014). After achieving SVR12, participants had marked improvements in fatigue over their pretreatment scores, measured by 3 separate validated questionnaires. Additional studies support and extend these findings beyond fatigue, with improvements in overall health-related quality of life and work productivity observed following successful HCV therapy (Gerber, 2016); (Younossi, 2016a); (Younossi, 2015b); (Younossi, 2015c); (Younossi, 2015d); (Younossi, 2015e). Dermatologic Manifestations The reported prevalence of HCV infection in patients with porphyria cutanea tarda approximates 50% and occurs disproportionately in those with cirrhosis (Gisbert, 2003). The treatment of choice for active porphyria cutanea tarda is iron reduction by phlebotomy and maintenance of a mildly iron-reduced state without anemia. Although improvement of porphyria cutanea tarda during HCV treatment with interferon has frequently been described (Takikawa, 1995), there are currently insufficient data to determine whether HCV DAA therapy and achievement of SVR results in porphyria cutanea tarda improvement. Lichen planus is characterized by pruritic papules involving mucous membranes, hair, and nails. HCV antibodies are present in 10% to 40% of patients with lichen planus but a causal link with chronic HCV infection is not established. Resolution of lichen planus has been reported with interferon-based regimens, but there have also been reports of exacerbation with these treatments. Although it is unknown whether DAAs will have more success against lichen planus, treatment with interferon-free regimens would appear to be a more advisable approach to addressing this disorder (Gumber, 1995); (Sayiner, 2017). Benefit of Treatment to Reduce Transmission Persons who have successfully achieved SVR (virologic cure) no longer transmit the virus to others. As such, successful treatment of HCV infection benefits public health. Several health models have shown that even modest increases in successful treatment of HCV infection among persons who inject drugs can decrease prevalence and incidence (Harris, 2016); (Martin, 2013a); (Martin, 2013b); (Durier, 2012); (Hellard, 2012). Models developed to estimate the impact of HCV testing and treatment on the burden of hepatitis C at a country level reveal that large decreases in HCV prevalence and incidence are possible as more persons are successfully treated (Wedemeyer, 2014). There are also benefits to eradicating HCV infection between couples and among families, thus eliminating the perception that an individual might be contagious. In addition, mother-to-child transmission of HCV does not occur if the woman is not viremic, providing an additional benefit of curing a woman before she becomes pregnant (Thomas, 1998). The safety and efficacy of treating women who are already pregnant, however, to prevent transmission to the fetus have not yet been established. Thus, treatment is not recommended for pregnant women. The Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA) advises that healthcare workers who have substantial HCV viral replication (≥104 genome equivalents/mL) be restricted from performing procedures that are prone to exposure (Henderson, 2010) and that all healthcare workers with confirmed chronic HCV infection should be treated. For reasons already stated, the achievement of SVR in such individuals will not only eliminate the risk of HCV transmission to patients but also decrease circumstantial loss of experienced clinicians. Given concerns about underreporting of infection and transmission (Henderson, 2010), the availability of effective, all-oral regimens should lead to greater willingness on the HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 6 of 11 When and in Whom to Initiate HCV Therapy Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) part of exposure-prone clinicians to be tested and treated. Successful treatment of HCV-infected persons at greatest risk for transmission represents a formidable tool to help stop HCV transmission in those who continue to engage in high-risk behaviors. To guide implementation of hepatitis C treatment as a prevention strategy, studies are needed to define the best candidates for treatment to stop transmission, the additional interventions needed to maximize the benefits of HCV treatment (eg, preventing reinfection), and the cost- effectiveness of the strategies when used in target populations. Persons Who Inject Drugs Injection drug use (IDU) is the most common risk factor for HCV infection in the United States and Europe, with an HCV seroprevalence rate of 10% to 70% (Amon, 2008); (Nelson, 2011). IDU also accounts for the majority of new HCV infections (approximately 70%) and is the key driving force in the perpetuation of the epidemic. Given these facts and the absence of an effective vaccine against HCV, testing and linkage to care combined with treatment of HCV infection with potent DAAs has the potential to dramatically decrease HCV incidence and prevalence (Martin, 2013b). However, treatment-based strategies to prevent HCV transmission have yet to be studied, including how to integrate hepatitis C treatment with other risk-reduction strategies (eg, opiate substitution therapy, and needle and syringe exchange programs) (Martin, 2013a). In studies of interferon-based treatments in persons who inject drugs, adherence and efficacy rates are comparable to those of patients who do not use injected drugs. A meta-analysis of treatment with peginterferon, with or without ribavirin, in active or recent injection drug users showed SVR rates of 37% and 67% for genotype 1 or 4, and 2 or 3, respectively (Aspinall, 2013). With the introduction of shorter, better-tolerated, and more efficacious interferon-free therapies, these SVR rates are expected to improve. Importantly, the rate of reinfection in this population is lower (2.4/100 person-years of observation) than that of incident infection in the general population of injection drug users (6.1 to 27.2/100 person-years), although reinfection increases with active or ongoing IDU (6.44/100 person-years) and available data on follow-up duration are limited (Aspinall, 2013); (Grady, 2013). Ideally, treatment of HCV-infected persons who inject drugs should be delivered in a multidisciplinary care setting with services to reduce the risk of reinfection and for management of the common social and psychiatric comorbidities in this population (Dore, 2016); (Mathei 2016); (Midgard 2016); (Murphy 2015). Regardless of the treatment setting, recent or active IDU should not be seen as an absolute contraindication to HCV therapy. There is strong evidence from various settings in which persons who inject drugs have demonstrated adherence to treatment and low rates of reinfection, countering arguments that have been commonly used to limit treatment access in this patient population (Hellard, 2014); (Aspinall, 2013); (Grebely, 2011). Indeed, combining HCV treatment with needle exchange and opioid agonist therapy programs in this population with a high prevalence of HCV has shown great value in decreasing the burden of HCV disease. Elegant modeling studies illustrate high return on the modest investment of addressing this often-ignored segment of the HCV-infected population (Martin, 2013b). These conclusions were drawn before the introduction of the latest DAA regimens. Conversely, there are no data to support the utility of pretreatment screening for illicit drug or alcohol use in identifying a population more likely to successfully complete HCV therapy. These requirements should be abandoned because they create barriers to treatment, add unnecessary cost and effort, and potentially exclude populations that are likely to obtain substantial benefit from therapy. Scaling up HCV treatment in persons who inject drugs is necessary to positively impact the HCV epidemic in the US and globally. HIV-Infected Men Who Have Sex With Men Since 2000, a dramatic increase in incident HCV infections among HIV-infected men who have sex with men (MSM) who did not report IDU as a risk factor has been demonstrated in several US cities (Samandari, 2017); (van de Laar, 2010). Recognition and treatment of HCV infection (including acute infection) in this population may represent an important step in preventing subsequent infections (Martin, 2016). As with persons who inject drugs, HIV/HCV-coinfected MSM who engage in ongoing high-risk sexual practices should be treated for their HCV infection in conjunction with continued education about risk-reduction strategies. In particular, safer-sex strategies should be emphasized given the high rate of reinfection after SVR, which may approach 30% over 2 years in HIV-infected MSM with acute HCV infection (Lambers, 2011). HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 7 of 11 When and in Whom to Initiate HCV Therapy Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Some of the best examples of HCV treatment as prevention of transmission have come from well characterized cohorts of HIV/HCV coinfected MSM. In the Dutch acute HCV in HIV study (DAHHS) cohort, a 51% decrease in HCV incidence among MSM living with HIV was realized in just 2 years after implementing a comprehensive HCV screening and immediate treatment program (Boerekamps, 2017). Similarly, in the Swiss HIV cohort study (SHCS), a 92.5% reduction in HCV prevalence and 51% decrease in incident HCV infections was realized shortly after implementing universal screening and treatment within an MSM cohort living with HIV (Braun, 2018). Incarcerated Persons Among incarcerated individuals, the rate of HCV seroprevalence ranges from 30% to 60% (Post, 2013) and the rate of acute infection is approximately 1% (Larney, 2013). Screening for HCV infection is relatively uncommon in state prison systems. Treatment uptake has historically been limited, in part because of the toxic effects and long treatment duration of older interferon-based therapies as well as cost concerns (Spaulding, 2006). In particular, truncation of HCV treatment owing to release from prison has been cited as a major limitation to widespread, effective HCV treatment in correctional facilities (Post, 2013); (Chew, 2009). Shorter HCV treatment duration with DAA regimens reduces stay-related barriers to HCV treatment in prisons. Likewise, the improved safety of DAA regimens diminishes concerns about toxic effects. Coordinated treatment efforts within prison systems would likely rapidly decrease HCV prevalence in this at-risk population (He, 2016), although research is needed in this area. Persons on Hemodialysis HCV prevalence is markedly elevated in persons on hemodialysis, ranging from 2.6% to 22.9% in a large multinational study (Fissell, 2004). US studies found a similarly elevated prevalence of 7.8% to 8.9% (Finelli, 2005); (CDC, 2001). Importantly, the seroprevalence of HCV was found to increase with time on dialysis, suggesting that nosocomial transmission, among other risk factors, plays a role in HCV acquisition in these patients (Fissell, 2004). Improved education and strict adherence to universal precautions can drastically reduce nosocomial HCV transmission risk for persons on hemodialysis (Jadoul, 1998), but clearance of HCV viremia through treatment-induced SVR eliminates the potential for transmission. HCV-infected persons on hemodialysis have a decreased quality of life and increased mortality compared to those who are uninfected (Fabrizi, 2009); (Fabrizi, 2007); (Fabrizi, 2002). HCV infection in this population also has a deleterious impact on kidney transplantation outcomes with decreased patient and graft survival (Fabrizi, 2014). The increased risk for nosocomial transmission and the substantial clinical impact of HCV infection in those on hemodialysis are compelling arguments for HCV therapy as effective antiviral regimens that can be used in persons with advanced renal failure are now available (see Patients with Renal Impairment). Patients Unlikely to Benefit From HCV Treatment Patients with a limited life expectancy that cannot be remediated by HCV treatment, liver transplantation, or another directed therapy do not require antiviral treatment. Patients with a short life expectancy owing to liver disease should be managed in consultation with an expert. Chronic hepatitis C is associated with a wide range of comorbid conditions (Louie, 2012); (Butt, 2011). Little evidence exists to support initiation of HCV treatment in patients with a limited life expectancy (<12 months) owing to nonliver-related comorbid conditions. For these patients, the benefits of HCV treatment are unlikely to be realized and palliative care strategies should take precedence (Maddison, 2011); (Holmes, 2006). HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 8 of 11 When and in Whom to Initiate HCV Therapy Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Pretreatment Assessment Recommendation for Pretreatment Assessment RECOMMENDED RATING Evaluation for advanced fibrosis using noninvasive markers and/or elastography, and rarely liver biopsy, is recommended for all persons with HCV infection to facilitate decision making regarding HCV treatment strategy and determine the need for initiating additional measures for the management of cirrhosis (eg, hepatocellular carcinoma screening) (see HCV Testing and Linkage to Care). I, A An accurate assessment of fibrosis remains vital as the degree of hepatic fibrosis is one of the most robust prognostic factors used to predict HCV disease progression and clinical outcomes (Everhart, 2010). Individuals with severe fibrosis require surveillance monitoring for liver cancer, esophageal varices, and hepatic function (Bruix, 2011); (Garcia-Tsao, 2007). In some instances, the recommended duration of treatment is also longer. Although liver biopsy is the diagnostic standard, sampling error and observer variability limit test performance, particularly when inadequate sampling occurs. Up to 1/3 of bilobar biopsies had a difference of at least 1 stage between the lobes (Bedossa, 2003). In addition, the test is invasive and minor complications are common, limiting patient and practitioner acceptance. Although rare, serious complications such as bleeding are well recognized. Noninvasive tests to stage the degree of fibrosis in patients with chronic HCV infection include models incorporating indirect serum biomarkers (routine tests), direct serum biomarkers (components of the extracellular matrix produced by activated hepatic stellate cells), and vibration-controlled transient liver elastography. No single method is recognized to have high accuracy alone, and each test must be interpreted carefully. A publication from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality found evidence in support of a number of blood tests; however, at best, they are only moderately useful for identifying clinically significant fibrosis or cirrhosis (Selph, 2014). Vibration-controlled transient liver elastography is a noninvasive way to measure liver stiffness and correlates well with measurement of substantial fibrosis or cirrhosis in patients with chronic HCV infection. The measurement range, however, overlaps between stages (Afdhal, 2015); (Castera, 2005); (Ziol, 2005). The most efficient approach to fibrosis assessment is to combine direct biomarkers and vibration-controlled transient liver elastography (European Association for the Study of the Liver and Asociacion Latinoamericana para el Estudio del Higado, 2015); (Boursier, 2012). A biopsy should be considered for any patient who has discordant results between the 2 modalities that would affect clinical decision making (eg, one shows cirrhosis and the other does not). The need for liver biopsy with this approach is markedly reduced. Alternatively, if direct biomarkers or vibration-controlled transient liver elastography are not available, the AST-to-platelet ratio index (APRI) or FIB-4 index score can prove helpful—although neither is sensitive enough to rule out substantial fibrosis (Chou, 2013); (Castera, 2010); (Sebastiani, 2009). Biopsy should be considered for those in whom more accurate fibrosis staging would impact treatment decisions. Individuals with clinically evident cirrhosis do not require additional staging (biopsy or noninvasive assessment). HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 9 of 11 When and in Whom to Initiate HCV Therapy Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommendation for Repeat Liver Disease Assessment RECOMMENDED RATING Ongoing assessment of liver disease is recommended for persons in whom therapy is deferred. I, C Ongoing assessment of liver disease is especially important in patients for whom therapy has been deferred. In line with evidence-driven recommendations for treatment of nearly all HCV-infected patients, several factors must be taken into consideration if treatment deferral is entertained or mandated by lack of medication access. As noted, strong and accumulating evidence argue against deferral because of decreased all-cause morbidity and mortality, prevention of onward transmission, and quality-of-life improvements for patients treated regardless of baseline fibrosis. Additionally, successful HCV treatment may improve or prevent extraheptatic complications, including diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease, renal disease, and B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (Torres, 2015); (Hsu, 2015); (Conjeevaram, 2011), which are not tied to fibrosis stage (Petta, 2016); (Allison, 2015). Deferral practices based on fibrosis stage alone are inadequate and shortsighted. Fibrosis progression varies markedly between individuals based on host, environmental, and viral factors (Table 1); (Feld, 2006). Fibrosis may not progress linearly. Some individuals (often those aged >50 years) may progress slowly for many years followed by accelerated fibrosis progression. Others may never develop substantial liver fibrosis despite longstanding infection. The presence of existing fibrosis is a strong risk factor for future fibrosis progression. Fibrosis results from chronic hepatic necroinflammation; thus, a higher activity grade on liver biopsy and higher serum transaminase levels are associated with more rapid fibrosis progression (Ghany, 2003). However, even patients with a normal ALT level may develop substantial liver fibrosis over time (Pradat, 2002); (Nutt, 2000). The limitations of transient elastography and liver biopsy in ascertaining the progression of fibrosis must be recognized. Host factors associated with more rapid fibrosis progression include male sex, longer duration of infection, and older age at the time of infection (Poynard, 2001). Many patients have concomitant nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. The presence of hepatic steatosis (with or without steatohepatitis) on liver biopsy, elevated body mass index, insulin resistance, and iron overload are associated with fibrosis progression (Konerman, 2014); (Everhart, 2009). Chronic alcohol use is an important risk factor because alcohol consumption has been associated with more rapid fibrosis progression (Feld, 2006). A safe amount of alcohol consumption has not been established. Cigarette smoking may also lead to more rapid fibrosis progression. For more counseling recommendations, see Testing and Linkage to Care. Immunosuppression leads to more rapid fibrosis progression, particularly in the settings of HIV/HCV coinfection and solid organ transplantation (Konerman, 2014); (Berenguer, 2013); (Macias, 2009). Therefore, immunocompromised patients should be treated even if they have mild liver fibrosis at presentation. HCV RNA level does not correlate with stage of disease (degree of inflammation or fibrosis). Available data suggest that fibrosis progression occurs most rapidly in patients with genotype 3 (Kanwal, 2014); (Bochud, 2009). Aside from coinfection with HBV or HIV, no other viral factors are consistently associated with disease progression. Although an ideal interval for assessment has not been established, annual evaluation is appropriate to discuss modifiable risk factors and update testing for hepatic function and markers of disease progression. For all individuals with advanced fibrosis, liver cancer screening dictates a minimum of evaluation every 6 months. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 10 of 11 When and in Whom to Initiate HCV Therapy Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Table. Factors Associated With Accelerated Fibrosis Progression Host Viral Nonmodifiable Fibrosis stage Inflammation grade Older age at time of infection Male sex Organ transplant Modifiable Alcohol consumption Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease Obesity Insulin resistance Genotype 3 Coinfection with hepatitis B virus or HIV Last reviewed: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 11 of 11 Overview of Cost, Reimbursement, and Cost-Effectiveness Considerat Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Overview of Cost, Reimbursement, and Cost-Effectiveness Considerations for Hepatitis C Treatment Regimens This section summarizes the US payer system, explains the concepts of cost, price, cost-effectiveness, value, and affordability, and addresses the cost-effectiveness of HCV treatment. This section aims to be informational. As described, actual costs are rarely known. Accordingly, the HCV guidance does not currently utilize cost-effectiveness analysis to guide recommendations. Drug Cost and Reimbursement Many organizations are involved with hepatitis C drug distribution and each can impact costs as well as decisions about which regimens are reimbursed (US GAO, 2015); (US CBO, 2015). The roles these organizations have in determining the actual price paid for drugs and who has access to treatment include the following: Pharmaceutical companies determine the wholesale acquisition cost (WAC) of a drug (analogous to a sticker price). The company negotiates contracts with other organizations within the pharmaceutical supply chain that allow for rebates or discounts to decrease the actual price paid. Pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs) act as intermediaries between pharmaceutical companies and health insurance companies. They negotiate contracts that may include restrictions on the types of providers or patients who can be reimbursed for treatment. They might also offer exclusivity (restrictions on which medications can be prescribed) in exchange for lower negotiated prices, often provided in the form of WAC discounts. Private insurance companies often have separate pharmacy and medical budgets, and use PBMs or directly negotiate drug pricing with pharmaceutical companies. Insurance companies determine formulary placement, which impacts the choice of regimens and out-of-pocket expenses for patients. An insurance company can cover private, managed care Medicaid, and Medicare plans and have different formularies for each line of business. Medicaid is a heterogeneous consortium of insurance plans that includes fee-for-service and managed care options. Most plans negotiate rebates with pharmaceutical manufacturers (through PBMs or individually). For single-source drugs such as all-oral HCV treatments, Medicaid plans receive the lowest price offered to any other payer (outside of certain government agencies), and the minimum Medicaid drug rebate is 23.1% of the average manufacturer price (AMP). Differences in negotiated contracts between plans have led to Medicaid patients in different states having widely varied access to HCV therapy (Lo Re, 2016); (Barua, 2015); (Canary, 2015). State Medicaid programs have benefited from the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), although such benefits are mitigated in states that have opted out of expanding Medicaid coverage under the ACA. As the price of HCV therapies has decreased, states have loosened their Medicaid treatment restrictions with a growing number providing treatment to all infected persons. Many states, however, continue to restrict access to HCV treatment based on stage of liver fibrosis or history of recent drug use. Proposed rollbacks of Medicaid expansion implemented under the ACA threaten to reduce insurance coverage among HCV-infected people and could lead to new treatment restrictions. Medicare covers HCV drugs through part D benefits and is prohibited by law from directly negotiating drug prices. These drug plans are offered through PBMs or commercial health plans, which may negotiate discounts or rebates with pharmaceutical companies. The Veterans Health Administration receives mandated rebates through the Federal Supply Schedule program, which sets drug prices for several government agencies (including the Department of Veterans Affairs, federal prisons, and the Department of Defense) and typically receives substantial discounts over average wholesale price (AWP). State prisons and jails are usually excluded from Medicaid-related rebates and often do not have the negotiating HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 5 Overview of Cost, Reimbursement, and Cost-Effectiveness Considerat Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) leverage of larger organizations and, therefore, may pay higher prices than most other organizations. Specialty pharmacies receive dispensing fees and may receive additional payments from contracted insurance companies, PBMs, or pharmaceutical companies to provide services such as adherence support and/or management of adverse effects, and outcome measurements, such as early discontinuation rates and sustained virologic response rates. Patients incur costs (eg, copayment or coinsurance) determined by their pharmacy plan. Patient assistance programs offered by pharmaceutical companies or foundations can cover many of these out-of-pocket expenses or provide drugs at no cost to qualified patients who are unable to pay. Except for mandated rebates, negotiated drug prices are considered confidential business contracts. Therefore, there is almost no transparency regarding the actual prices paid for hepatitis C drugs (Saag, 2015). However, the average negotiated discount of 22% in 2014 increased to 46% less than the WAC in 2015, implying that many payers are paying well below the WAC for HCV medications (Committee on Finance US Senate, 2016). Cost-Effectiveness Cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA) compares the relative costs and outcomes of 2 or more interventions. CEA explicitly recognizes budget limitations for healthcare spending and seeks to maximize public health benefits within those budgetary constraints. The core question that CEA addresses is whether to invest limited healthcare dollars in a new treatment/therapy or use that money to invest in another healthcare intervention that would provide better outcomes for the same monetary investment. The focus of CEA is, therefore, not simply cost or saving money but health benefits. It assumes that all available resources will be spent and provides a framework for prioritizing among available treatment options by formally assessing the comparative costs and health benefits accrued from a new treatment relative to current treatment. The cost-effectiveness of a treatment is typically expressed as an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER). cost new treatment - cost current treatment benefit new treatment - benefit current treatment Estimating and Interpreting the ICER Estimating and interpreting the ICER requires answering 3 questions: 1. How much more money will be spent with the new treatment versus the old treatment? The additional cost of new treatment includes that of new medications as well as the costs that will be avoided by preventing disease complications. Prevention of long-term complications is especially important when considering the cost-effectiveness of HCV treatments because the costs of the therapy are immediate, while those avoided by preventing advanced liver disease and other complications of chronic infection often accrue years in the future. 2. How much more benefit will occur with the new versus the old treatment? Life expectancy is a valuable measure of benefit but considering only mortality benefits fails to recognize the value of treatments that improve quality of life. The quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) provides a measure that integrates both longevity and quality of life and is the preferred outcome for CEA. 3. How is the ICER to be interpreted? The ideal CEA would list every possible healthcare intervention, its lifetime medical cost, and QALYs lived. Such a list would allow for perfect theoretical prioritization of spending to maximize QALY across the population. In reality, CEA compares the ICER for a specific treatment to a threshold value and rejects treatments with an ICER exceeding a particular threshold as not being cost-effective. The threshold value is referred to as the societal willingness-to-pay threshold. It is not meant to be a valuation of how much society is willing to pay to save a life. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 5 Overview of Cost, Reimbursement, and Cost-Effectiveness Considerat Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Rather, it is meant to reflect the average return in QALY expected if the available budget was not used to provide a new treatment but instead invested into the current healthcare system. In the United States, the willingness-to-pay threshold is typically considered to be $50,000 or $100,000 per QALY gained. Affordability An intervention that is cost-effective is not necessarily affordable. Affordability refers to whether a payer has sufficient resources in its annual budget to pay for a new therapy for all who might need or want it within that year. Several characteristics of CEA limit its ability to speak to the budgetary impact of interventions being implemented in the real world. 1. Perspective on cost CEA seeks to inform decisions about how society should prioritize healthcare spending. As such, it typically assumes a societal perspective on costs and includes all costs from all payers, including out-of-pocket expenses for the patient. When making coverage decisions for therapy, however, an insurer considers only its own revenues and expenses. 2. Time horizon From a societal perspective, CEA uses a lifetime time horizon, meaning it considers lifetime costs and benefits, including those that occur in the distant future. Business budget planning, however, typically assumes a 1-year to 5-year perspective. Savings that may accrue 30 years from now have no impact on spending decisions today because they have little bearing on the solvency of the current budget. 3. Weak association between willingness-to-pay and the real-world bottom line Societal willingness-to-pay thresholds in CEAs are not based on actual budget calculations and have little relationship to a payer’s bottom line. Willingness-to-pay is meant to be an estimate of the opportunity cost of investing in a new therapy. In economics, opportunity cost refers to how else that money could have been spent and the benefits lost from not investing in that alternative (Wong, 2017a). When payers make a decision about coverage, the calculation is more straightforward and relates to the short-term cost of medications and the budgetary impact. Given the rapid development of new technologies and therapies, funding all of them (even if they all fell below the societal willingness-to-pay threshold) would likely lead to uncontrolled growth in demand and exceed the limited healthcare budget. There is no formula that provides a good means of integrating the concerns of value and affordability. When new HCV therapies are deemed cost-effective, it indicates that these therapies provide good benefit for the resources invested and providing such therapy to more people would be a good long-term investment. Determining the total resources that can be spent on HCV treatment, however, depends on political and economic factors that are not captured by cost-effectiveness determinations. Cost-Effectiveness of Current Direct-Acting Antiviral Regimens for Hepatitis C Treatment Since the first direct-acting antivirals (DAAs) received US Food and Drug Administration approval in 2011, several cost- effectiveness investigations have compared DAA-based regimens to previous standard-of-care regimens to calculate ICERs. They have also investigated the cost-effectiveness of eliminating HCV treatment restrictions. Compared to interferon-based regimens, the ICER for DAAs has consistently been estimated at <$100,000 per QALY for all genotypes and fibrosis stages. Several studies have compared DAA regimens against one another. In general, when given a choice between recommended HCV DAA regimens, the less costly regimen is preferred as a more efficient use of resources (even if it requires multiple tablet dosing). Because of the similar efficacy of most DAA regimens, cost becomes the critical factor driving relative cost-effectiveness. Studies have also estimated the cost-effectiveness of HCV treatment in special populations, including patients awaiting liver transplantation, HIV/HCV-coinfected patients, those with chronic kidney disease, persons who inject drugs, and adolescents—all with favorable ICERs. At this time, it is reasonable to conclude that DAA regimens provide good value for the resources invested. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 5 Overview of Cost, Reimbursement, and Cost-Effectiveness Considerat Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Cost vs Affordability for HCV Treatment Despite a growing body of evidence that HCV treatment is cost-effective and may even be cost saving over the long term in some cases, many US payers—especially those offering Medicaid insurance products—continue to limit access to HCV treatment. Access has improved as cost has decreased but limitations remain. Proposed reductions in healthcare spending for Medicaid would likely exacerbate the problem as the value of the HCV medications would remain unchanged but the resources available to provide them would shrink. Cost-Effectiveness of Screening for HCV Several cost-effectiveness studies demonstrate that routine, one-time testing for HCV among all adults in the US would likely identify a substantial number of cases of HCV that are currently being missed, and that doing so would be cost- effective. One study employed simulation modeling to compare several versions of routine guidance, including routine testing for adults over the ages of 40 years, 30 years, and 18 years and found that routine testing for all adults aged ≥18 years was cost-effective compared to risk-based screening, and potentially cost-saving compared to testing only those aged ≥30 years or aged ≥40 years (Barocas, 2018). The study further found that routine testing remained cost-effective unless HCV infection had no impact on healthcare utilization and no impact on quality of life. Another research group similarly found that routine testing of all adults aged ≥18 years is likely cost-effective compared to risk-based screening, so long as the prevalence of HCV among those born after 1965 exceeds 0.07% (Eckman, 2019). Notably, these studies reached similar conclusions despite being conducted entirely independently and employing different simulation modeling approaches. Further, a variety of studies have examined the cost-effectiveness of routine HCV testing in specific venues, including correctional settings (He, 2016), prenatal care settings (Chaillon, 2019); (Tasillo, 2019), substance use treatment centers (Schackman, 2018); (Schackman, 2015), and federally qualified health centers (Assoumou, 2018). All of them found that routine testing and treatment for HCV was cost-effective, even when linkage to HCV treatment after testing was poor, and even when the rate of HCV reinfection among injection drug users is common. Generally, routine HCV testing is cost-effective because the incidence and prevalence of HCV remain high in people who inject drugs with a notable rising prevalence in young adults who may not readily report their stigmatized risk behaviors. Studies conducted in urban emergency departments in the US, for example, reveal that 15% to 25% of patients with previously unidentified HCV infection were born after 1965 and/or have no reported history of injection drug use and are, therefore, missed by even perfect implementation of risk-based screening (Schechter-Perkins, 2018); (Hsieh, 2016); (Lyons, 2016). Reinfection among those actively using drugs is common but because screening is a low-cost intervention, and therapy is both highly effective and cost-effective, routine testing provides good economic value (ie, cost-effective) even when many people need to be tested and treated more than once during their lifetime. Conclusions Many studies have demonstrated the economic value of HCV screening (Chaillon, 2019); (Eckman, 2019); (Tasillo, 2019); (Assoumou, 2018); (Barocas, 2018); (Schackman, 2018); (Schechter-Perkins, 2018); (Lyons, 2016); (Hsieh, 2016); (Schackman, 2015)  and treatment (Goel, 2018); (Chhatwal, 2017); (He, 2017); (Chahal, 2016); (Chhatwal, 2015); (Chidi, 2016); (Martin, 2016a); (Linas, 2015); (Najafzadeh, 2015); (Rein, 2015); (Tice, 2015); (Younossi, 2015a) and made it clear that HCV screening and therapy are cost-effective. In response, in 2020, both the US Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and Prevention and the US Preventive Service Task Force (USPSTF) recommended routine, one-time HCV testing for all US asymptomatic adults aged 18 to 79 without known liver disease (Owens, 2020); (Schillie, 2020). A US study found reductions in measures of health care utilization (i.e. liver-related emergency department visits, liver-related hospitalizations, and all-cause hospitalizations) among cases who achieved SVR after DAA therapy compared to matched controls (Gordon, 2022). The high cost of HCV medications and the high prevalence of disease have led to limited access for some patients. The issue is complex. Although the wholesale acquisition costs of HCV drugs often make treatment appear unaffordable, the reality is that insurers, PBMs, and government agencies negotiate pricing, and few actually pay this much-publicized price. Negotiated pricing and cost structure for pharmaceutical products in the US, however, are not transparent. Thus, it is difficult to estimate the true budgetary impact of providing HCV drugs. Competition and negotiated pricing have reduced prices substantially but cost continues to limit the public health impact of DAA therapies. Insurers, HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 4 of 5 Overview of Cost, Reimbursement, and Cost-Effectiveness Considerat Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) government, and pharmaceutical companies should work together to bring medication prices to the point where all persons in need of treatment are able to afford and readily access it. Only 3 US states and only 24% of high-income countries are on target to meet the WHO 2030 hepatitis C elimination targets (Gamkrelidze, 2021); (Sulkowski 2021). Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 5 of 5 Monitoring Patients Who Are Starting HCV Treatment, Are on Treatme Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Monitoring Patients Who Are Starting HCV Treatment, Are on Treatment, or Have Completed Therapy This section provides guidance on monitoring patients with chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection who are starting direct- acting antiviral (DAA) treatment, are on treatment, or have completed therapy. It is divided into 4 parts: pretreatment and on-treatment monitoring (including patients with incomplete adherence); posttreatment follow-up for persons in whom treatment failed to clear the virus; posttreatment follow-up for those who achieve a sustained virologic response (SVR; virologic cure); and additional considerations if treatment includes ribavirin. Pretreatment and On-Treatment Monitoring Recommended Assessments Prior to Starting DAA Therapy RECOMMENDED RATING Staging of hepatic fibrosis is essential prior to HCV treatment (see Testing and Linkage to Care and see When and in Whom to Treat). Assessment of potential drug-drug interactions with concomitant medications is recommended prior to starting DAA therapy and, when possible, an interacting co-medication should be stopped or switched to an alternative with less risk for potential interaction during HCV treatment. (See Table of Drug Interactions with Direct-Acting Antivirals and Selected Concomitant Medications below or use an online resource such as University of Liverpool interaction checker.) Patients should be educated about the proper administration of DAA medications (eg, dose, frequency of medicines, food effects, missed doses, adverse events, etc), the crucial importance of adherence, and the need to inform the healthcare provider about any changes to their medication regimen. The following laboratory tests are recommended within 6 months prior to starting DAA therapy: Complete blood count (CBC) International normalized ratio (INR) Hepatic function panel (ie, serum albumin, total and direct bilirubin, alanine aminotransferase [ALT], aspartate aminotransferase [AST], and alkaline phosphatase levels) Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) The following laboratory tests are recommended any time prior to starting DAA therapy: Quantitative HCV RNA (HCV viral load) If a nonpangenotypic DAA will be prescribed, then test for HCV genotype and subtype. I, C HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 14 Monitoring Patients Who Are Starting HCV Treatment, Are on Treatme Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommended Assessments Prior to Starting DAA Therapy The safety of ribavirin-free DAA regimens in humans has not been established during pregnancy and for nursing mothers, so counseling should be offered to women of childbearing age before beginning HCV treatment. (See ribavirin pregnancy recommendations below.) I, C All patients initiating DAA therapy should be assessed for active hepatitis B virus (HBV) coinfection with HBV surface antigen (HBsAg) testing, and for evidence of prior infection with HBV core antibody (anti-HBc) and HBV surface antibody (anti-HBs) testing. IIa, B Patients found or known to be HBsAg-positive should be assessed for whether their HBV DNA level meets AASLD criteria for HBV treatment and initiation of antiviral therapy for HBV. Strong, Moderatea All patients should be assessed for HIV coinfection prior to initiating DAA therapy. IIa, B Testing for the presence of resistance-associated substitutions (RASs) prior to starting treatment should be performed as recommended in the Initial Treatment and the Retreatment sections. Additional information about RAS testing can be found in the HCV Resistance Primer. IIb, B Patients scheduled to receive an HCV NS3 protease inhibitor (ie, grazoprevir, voxilaprevir, glecaprevir) should be assessed for a history of decompensated liver disease and liver disease severity using the Child-Turcotte-Pugh (CTP) score (see third-party calculator). Patients with current or prior history of decompensated liver disease or with a current CTP score ≥7 should not receive treatment with regimens that contain NS3 protease inhibitors due to increased blood levels and/or lack of safety data. I, A a Unlike the AASLD/IDSA HCV guidance, the AASLD guidelines for treatment of chronic hepatitis B uses the GRADE system to rate recommendations; please see that document for further information about this rating system. Recommended Monitoring During Antiviral Therapy RECOMMENDED RATING Clinic visits or telephone contact are recommended as clinically indicated during treatment to ensure medication adherence and monitor for adverse events and potential drug-drug interactions (see table of Drug Interactions with Direct-Acting Antivirals and Selected Concomitant Medications below), especially with newly prescribed medications. I, B Inform patients taking diabetes medication of the potential for symptomatic hypoglycemia. On- treatment and posttreatment monitoring for hypoglycemia is recommended. I, C Inform patients taking warfarin of the potential for changes in their anticoagulation status. On- treatment and posttreatment INR monitoring for subtherapeutic anticoagulation is recommended. I, C Patients receiving elbasvir/grazoprevir should be monitored with a hepatic function panel at 8 weeks and again at 12 weeks if receiving 16 weeks of treatment. I, B A ≥10-fold increase in ALT values from baseline at any time during treatment should prompt discontinuation of DAA therapy (especially with signs or symptoms of liver inflammation or increasing conjugated bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, or INR). I, B HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 14 Monitoring Patients Who Are Starting HCV Treatment, Are on Treatme Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommended Monitoring During Antiviral Therapy An increase in ALT <10-fold from baseline that is accompanied by any weakness, nausea, vomiting, jaundice, or significantly increased bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, or INR should also prompt discontinuation of DAA therapy. Asymptomatic increases in ALT <10-fold from baseline should be closely monitored with repeat testing at 2-week intervals. If levels remain persistently elevated, consideration should be given to discontinuation of DAA therapy. Quantitative HCV viral load testing is recommended 12 or more weeks after completion of therapy to document sustained virologic response (SVR), which is consistent with cure of chronic HCV infection. I, B For HBsAg-positive patients not already receiving HBV suppressive therapy because their baseline HBV DNA level does not meet treatment criteria, one of two approaches may be taken: Initiate prophylactic HBV antiviral therapy for those with low or undetectable HBV DNA levels. If this course is elected, pending further data, prophylaxis should be continued until 12 weeks after completion of DAA therapy. Monitor HBV DNA levels monthly during and immediately after DAA therapy. Antiviral treatment for HBV should be given in the event of a rise in HBV DNA >10-fold above baseline or to >1000 IU/mL in those with a previously undetectable or unquantifiable HBV DNA level. IIa, B The recommended pretreatment testing assumes that a decision to treat with antiviral medications has already been made and that the testing involved in deciding to treat—including testing for HCV genotype and assessment of hepatic fibrosis—has already been completed (see When and in Whom to Initiate HCV Therapy). Prior to starting treatment, patients should be evaluated for potential drug-drug interactions with selected antiviral medications by consulting the prescribing information and using other resources (eg, http://www.hep-druginteractions.org ). The table below lists known drug-drug interactions between HCV DAAs and selected medications. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 14 Monitoring Patients Who Are Starting HCV Treatment, Are on Treatme Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Table. Drug Interactions with Direct-Acting Antivirals and Selected Concomitant Medications Concomitant Medications SOF/VEL GLE/PIB SOF/VEL/VOX LDV/SOF EBR/GZR Acid-reducing agents Antacids H2RA PPI H2RA PPI Antacids H2RA PPI Antacids H2RA PPI Alpha-1 blockers Prazosin Silodosin Prazosin Silodosin Prazosin Silodosin Silodosin Prazosin Silodosin Analgesics Metamizole Alfentanil Fentanyl Hydrocodone Metamizole Oxycodone Metamizole Fentanyl Metamizole Oxycodone Antiarrhythmics Amiodarone Dronedarone Amiodarone Digoxin Dronedarone Quinidine Amiodarone Dronedarone Amiodarone Dronedarone Amiodarone Dronedarone Quinidine Digoxin Quinidine Digoxin Quinidine Digoxin Quinidine Anticoagulant and antiplatelet agents Apixaban Dabigatran Edoxaban Rivaroxaban Ticagrelor Warfarin Dabigatran Dabigatran Edoxaban Apixaban Dabigatran Edoxaban Rivaroxaban Ticagrelor Warfarin Apixaban Dabigatran Edoxaban Rivaroxaban Ticagrelor Warfarin Apixaban Edoxaban Rivaroxaban Ticagrelor Warfarin Apixaban Rivaroxaban Ticagrelor Warfarin Anticonvulsants and barbiturates Amobarbital Carbamazepine Eslicarbazine Oxcarbazepine Phenobarbital Phenytoin Primidone Amobarbital Carbamazepine Eslicarbazine Oxcarbazepine Phenobarbital Phenytoin Primidone Amobarbital Carbamazepine Eslicarbazine Oxcarbazepine Phenobarbital Phenytoin Primidone Amobarbital Carbamazepine Oxcarbazepine Phenobarbital Phenytoin Primidone Amobarbital Carbamazepine Eslicarbazine Oxcarbazepine Phenobarbital Phenytoin Primidone Rufinamide Rufinamide Rufinamide Rufinamide Zonisamide Rufinamide Antihypertensives Diltiazem Aliskiren Aliskiren Enalapril Irbesartan Isradipine Non-DHP CCB Olmesartan Telmisartan Valsartan Aliskiren Amlodipine Diltiazem Eplerenone Felodipine Irbesartan Isradipine Eplerenone Felodipine Isradipine Enalapril Eplerenone Irbesartan Isradipine Non-DHP CCB Olmesartan Telmisartan Antimycobacterials Rifabutin Rifampicin Rifapentine Rifabutin Rifampicin Rifapentine Rifabutin Rifampin Rifapentine Bedaquiline Rifabutin Rifampicin Rifapentine Bedaquiline Rifabutin Rifampicin Rifapentine Bedaquiline HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 4 of 14 Monitoring Patients Who Are Starting HCV Treatment, Are on Treatme Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Antipsychotics – first generation Pimozide Pimozide Pimozide Droperidol Thioridazine Antipsychotics – second generation Aripiprazole Clozapine Paliperidone Quetiapine Paliperidone Paliperidone Aripiprazole Quetiapine Antiretrovirals See HIV/HCV Coinfection Section Azole antifungals Ketoconazole Posaconazole Ketoconazole Benzodiazepines Midazolam Bronchodilators Theophylline Buprenorphine/ naloxone Calcineurin inhibitors Cyclosporine Tacrolimus Cyclosporine Cyclosporine Tacrolimus Tacrolimus Cancer Therapies Acalabrutinib Erlotinib Everolimus Imatinib Irinotecan Lapatinib Methotrexate Mitoxantrone Nilotinib Sunitinib Temsirolimus Vinblastine Vincristine Vinorelbine Acalabrutinib Bosutinib Doxorubicin Erlotinib Everolimus Imatinib Irinotecan Lapatinib Methotrexate Mitoxantrone Nilotinib Paclitaxel Sunitinib Temsirolimus Vinorelbine Acalabrutinib Erlotinib Everolimus Sunitinib Temsirolimus Vinorelbine Acalabrutinib Erlotinib Everolimus Irinotecan Lapatinib Mitoxantrone Sunitinib Temsirolimus Vinorelbine Acalabrutinib Bosutinib Erlotinib Everolimus Imatinib Irinotecan Lapatinib Methotrexate Mitoxantrone Nilotinib Paclitaxel Sunitinib Temsirolimus Vinblastine Vincristine Vinorelbine Vinblastine Vincristine Imatinib Irinotecan Lapatinib Methotrexate Mitoxantrone Nilotinib Vinblastine Vincristine Cholesterol- lowering agents Atorvastatin Fluvastatin Lovastatin Pitavastatin Rosuvastatin Simvastatin Atorvastatin Lovastatin Simvastatin Atorvastatin Fluvastatin Lovastatin Pitavastatin Rosuvastatin Simvastatin Rosuvastatin Atorvastatin Fluvastatin Gemfibrozil Lovastatin Rosuvastatin Simvastatin Ezetimibe Fluvastatin Gemfibrozil Pitavastatin Ezetimibe Pravastatin Atorvastatin Fluvastatin Lovastatin Pitavastatin HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 5 of 14 Monitoring Patients Who Are Starting HCV Treatment, Are on Treatme Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Pravastatin Rosuvastatin Pravastatin Simvastatin Cisapride COVID-19 antivirals Molnupiravir Remdesivir Nirmatrelvir/ ritonavir Molnupiravir Remdesivir Molnupiravir Remdesivir Molnupiravir Remdesivir Nirmatrelvir/ ritonavir Molnupiravir Remdesivir Nirmatrelvir/ ritonavir Nirmatrelvir/ ritonavir Nirmatrelvir/ ritonavir Ergot derivatives Ethinyl estradiol containing products Glucocorticoids Dexamethasone Dexamethasone Dexamethasone Heart failure agents Bosentan Bosentan Bosentan Bosentan Ambrisentan Ambrisentan Ambrisentan Herbals St. John’s wort St. John’s wort St. John’s wort St. John’s wort St. John’s wort Loop diuretics Macrolide antimicrobials Troleandomycin Erythromycin Telithromycin Erythromycin Telithromycin Telithromycin Telithromycin Troleandomycin Troleandomycin Troleandomycin Phosphodiesterase -5 inhibitors Recreational Drugs Carfentanil GHB Carfentanil GHB H2RA=Histamine H2 Antagonist; PPI=proton pump inhibitor; DHP CCB=dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker; Non- DHP CCB=non dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker. Green indicates coadministration is safe; yellow indicates a dose change or additional monitoring is warranted; and red indicates the combination should be avoided. Specific concomitant medications or medication classes with actual or theoretical potential for interaction are listed in the box. The education of patients and caregivers about potential adverse effects of DAA therapy and their management is an integral component of treatment and is important for a successful outcome in all patient populations. During DAA treatment, individuals should be followed at clinically appropriate intervals to ensure medication adherence, assess adverse events and potential drug-drug interactions, and monitor blood test results necessary for patient safety. This includes on-treatment and posttreatment monitoring for hypoglycemia or subtherapeutic INR levels among patients taking diabetes medicines or warfarin, respectively. Real-world data indicate an association between DAA therapy and related changes in hepatic function and alterations in dose-response relationships with these medications (Drazilova, 2018); (Abdel Alem, 2017); (Rindone, 2017); (Pavone, 2016); (DeCarolis, 2016); (Soriano, 2016). Inform patients on these medications about the potential for these developments; make dose adjustments as needed. The frequency and type of contact (eg, clinic visit, phone call, etc) are variable but need to be sufficient to assess patient safety and response to treatment, as outlined above. Routine testing for HCV RNA during treatment is not recommended unless the ALT level fails to decline (when elevated) or there are concerns regarding patient adherence with DAA treatment. There are no data to support stopping treatment based on detectable HCV RNA during the first 4 weeks of treatment, or that detectable HCV RNA at this time point signifies medication nonadherence. It is essential to test for HCV RNA 12 weeks (or longer) after treatment completion. Undetectable or unquantifiable HCV HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 6 of 14 Monitoring Patients Who Are Starting HCV Treatment, Are on Treatme Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) RNA 12 weeks or longer after treatment completion is defined as a sustained virologic response (SVR), which is consistent with cure of chronic HCV infection. Virologic relapse is rare 12 weeks or longer after treatment completion (Sarrazin, 2017); (Simmons, 2016). Nevertheless, repeat quantitative HCV RNA testing can be considered at 24 or more weeks after completing treatment for patients in whom ALT increases to above the upper limit of normal. During clinical trials with elbasvir/grazoprevir, with or without ribavirin, 1% of participants experienced ALT elevations from normal levels to >5 times the upper limit of normal, generally at or after treatment week 8. ALT elevations were typically asymptomatic, and most resolved with ongoing therapy or completion of therapy. Higher rates of late ALT elevations occurred in females, those of Asian descent, and patients aged ≥65 years. Hepatic laboratory testing should be performed prior to therapy, at treatment week 8, and as clinically indicated. For patients receiving 16 weeks of therapy, additional hepatic laboratory testing should be performed at treatment week 12 (Zepatier package insert, 2019). One recent cohort study of 18,498 initiators of PI-based DAA therapy (paritaprevir/ritonavir/ombitasvir +/- dasabuvir, elbasvir/grazoprevir, glecaprevir/pibrentasvir) matched 1:1 on propensity score to non-PI-based DAA initiators (ledipasvir/sofosbuvir, sofosbuvir/velpatasvir) was conducted within the US Veterans Health Administration from 2014-2019 (Torgersen, 2021). During exposure to DAA therapy, the study determined incident development of: 1) ALT >200 U/L, 2) severe hepatic dysfunction (defined by coagulopathy with hyperbilirubinemia), and 3) hepatic decompensation, according to baseline FIB-4 score (≤3.25; >3.25). The analysis found that the risk of incident ALT elevations was increased among PI-based DAA initiators in both FIB-4 groups, but the risk of severe hepatic dysfunction or hepatic decompensation did not differ between PI and non-PI-based DAA initiators in either FIB-4 group. Patients being treated with amiodarone should not receive sofosbuvir-based regimens due to risk of life-threatening arrhythmias. Because of its long half-life, it is advised that persons should be off amiodarone for at least 6 months before initiating sofosbuvir. If the decision is made to start sofosbuvir in this setting, continued vigilance for bradycardia should be exercised. Simplified HCV Treatment for Treatment-Naïve Adults Recent data from a global sample of patients undergoing antiviral treatment for chronic HCV infection suggested that a minimal monitoring approach was safe and achieved SVR at a rate comparable to that with standard monitoring. This minimal monitoring approach was examined in a phase 4, open label, single-arm trial that enrolled 400 treatment-naïve patients 18 years or older with HCV RNA >1,000 IU/mL from Brazil, South Africa, Thailand, Uganda, and the USA with capped inclusion of compensated cirrhosis and HIV/HCV coinfection (Solomon, 2022). Pregnancy, breastfeeding, or evidence of chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection (HBsAg-positive) were exclusion criteria; however, participants with resolved HBV infection (hepatitis B core total antibody [anti-HBc] with or without positive hepatitis B surface antibodies [anti-HBs]) were eligible. Patients initiated treatment with fixed dose sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) once daily for 12 weeks. Minimal monitoring involved: 1) no pre-treatment genotyping; 2) dispensing the entire treatment course (84 tablets) at entry; 3) no scheduled visits or laboratory monitoring; and 4) remote contact at week 4 to assess DAA adherence and at week 22 to schedule SVR assessment at week 24. Of the 400 participants, 399 initiated sofosbuvir/velpatasvir treatment. At entry, 166 (42%) were living with HIV, 34 (9%) had compensated cirrhosis, and 121 (32%) of 374 with HBV panel (HBsAg, anti-HBc, anti-HBs) available had evidence of resolved HBV infection. Overall, 379 of the 399 who initiated treatment achieved SVR (95.0%; 95% CI, 92.4-96.7%). A total of 14 (4%) of 397 participants reported serious adverse events between treatment initiation and week 28, but none were treatment-related or led to treatment discontinuation or death. Because of the possible risk for HBV reactivation that could be fulminant, these HBV-HCV co-infected patients should be excluded. Given the findings of this minimal monitoring study, simplified HCV treatment approaches are available for HCV treatment- naïve adults without cirrhosis (click here) and for HCV treatment-naïve adults with compensated cirrhosis (click here). Pregnancy and Nursing Mothers Few adequate and well-controlled human studies are available to establish whether DAAs pose a risk to pregnancy outcomes or whether DAAs and their metabolites are present in breastmilk. An open-label, phase 1 study of HIV-negative pregnant women with chronic genotype 1 infection evaluated a 12-week course of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir initiated between HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 7 of 14 Monitoring Patients Who Are Starting HCV Treatment, Are on Treatme Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) 23 to 24 weeks of gestation (Chappell, 2019). Among 7 evaluable patients, all achieved SVR12; adverse events related ledipasvir/sofosbuvir were ≤ grade 2. All 7 participants delivered at term with undetectable HCV viral loads at delivery. One-year follow-up of the infants is ongoing. Given the dearth of data on this topic, clinicians should discuss with female patients that DAAs should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit of DAA therapy justifies the potential risk of harm to the fetus. The health benefits of DAA therapy for nursing mothers should be weighed against the health benefits of breast feeding and the possible adverse effects of the DAA regimen on the breastfed child. Given the relatively short duration of treatment and the availability of ribavirin-free regimens in most patients, the potential risk of harms and benefits of delaying pregnancy until HCV DAA therapy is completed should be considered. For additional information about HCV and pregnancy, click here. Reactivation of Hepatitis B Virus Infection Cases of hepatitis B virus (HBV) reactivation, occasionally fulminant, during or after DAA therapy have been reported in HBV/HCV coinfected patients who were not receiving HBV suppressive therapy (Mücke, 2018); (Bersoff-Matcha, 2017); (Chen, 2017). Therefore, all patients initiating DAA therapy should be assessed for HBV coinfection with HBsAg testing, and for evidence of prior infection with anti-HBc and anti-HBs testing. HBV vaccination is recommended for all susceptible individuals. Testing for HBV DNA should be performed prior to DAA therapy in patients who are HBsAg positive. HBsAg- positivity does not represent a contraindication to DAA therapy. Patients meeting criteria for treatment of active HBV infection should be started on HBV therapy at the same time or before DAA therapy is initiated (Terrault, 2018). Patients with a low or undetectable HBV DNA level can either receive prophylactic HBV treatment for the duration of DAA treatment until assessment for SVR12 or be monitored at regular intervals (usually not more frequently than every 4 weeks) for HBV reactivation with HBV DNA testing. If monitoring is elected, HBV treatment should be started if the HBV DNA level increases >10-fold or is >1000 IU/mL in a patient with undetectable or unquantifiable HBV DNA prior to DAA treatment. There are insufficient data to provide clear recommendations for the monitoring of HBV DNA among patients testing positive either for anti-HBc alone (isolated anti-HBc) or for both anti-HBc and anti-HBs (resolved infection). However, the possibility of HBV reactivation should be considered in these patients in the event of an unexplained increase in liver aminotransferase levels during and/or after completion of DAA therapy. Posttreatment Follow-Up for Patients in Whom Treatment Failed Recommended Monitoring for Patients in Whom Treatment Failed to Achieve a Sustained Virologic Response RECOMMENDED RATING Retreatment for chronic HCV is recommended utilizing the regimens recommended in the Retreatment section. I, C Disease progression assessment every 6 to 12 months with a hepatic function panel, complete blood count (CBC), and international normalized ratio (INR) is recommended if patients are not retreated or fail a second or third DAA treatment course. I, C Surveillance for hepatocellular carcinoma with liver ultrasound examination, with or without alpha fetoprotein (AFP), every 6 months is recommended for patients with cirrhosisa in accordance with the AASLD guidance on the diagnosis, staging, and management of hepatocellular carcinoma. Low, Conditionalb For patients with cirrhosis, endoscopic surveillance for varices should be performed in accordance with the AASLD guidance on portal hypertension bleeding in cirrhosis. Guidanceb a For decompensated cirrhosis, please refer to the appropriate section. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 8 of 14 Monitoring Patients Who Are Starting HCV Treatment, Are on Treatme Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommended Monitoring for Patients in Whom Treatment Failed to Achieve a Sustained Virologic Response b Unlike the AASLD/IDSA HCV guidance, the AASLD guidelines use the GRADE system to rate recommendations; please see that document for further information about this rating system. The Following Monitoring Is Not Recommended During or After Therapy NOT RECOMMENDED RATING Monitoring for HCV drug resistance-associated substitutions (RASs) during or after therapy is not recommended unless retreatment will be performed. RAS testing is recommended in advance of retreatment therapy. See the Retreatment section for recommendations regarding RAS testing prior to retreatment. Additional information about RAS testing can be found in the HCV Resistance Primer. IIb, C Patients who do not achieve SVR retain the possibility of continued liver injury, progression of hepatic fibrosis, and the potential to transmit HCV infection to others. Such patients should be considered for retreatment per the Retreatment of Persons in Whom Prior Therapy Has Failed section. Given that persons in whom treatment failed remain at risk for ongoing liver injury and liver fibrosis progression (Dienstag, 2011), these patients should be monitored for signs and symptoms of decompensated cirrhosis. Patients in whom antiviral therapy failed may harbor viruses that are resistant to one or more of the antivirals at the time of virologic breakthrough (Lawitz, 2014a); (Schneider, 2014). There is no evidence to date, however, that the presence of resistance- associated substitutions (RASs) results in more progressive liver injury than would have occurred if the patient did not have resistant viruses. Additional information about RASs and RAS testing can be found in the HCV Resistance Primer section. If there remains uncertainty regarding the applicability of RAS testing, consultation with an expert regarding the treatment of HCV infection may be useful. Posttreatment Follow-Up for Patients Who Achieved a Sustained Virologic Response Recommended Follow-Up for Patients Who Achieved a Sustained Virologic Response (SVR) RECOMMENDED RATING For noncirrhotic patients, recommended follow-up is the same as if they were never infected with HCV. I, B Assessment for HCV recurrence is recommended only if the patient develops unexplained hepatic dysfunction, or annual assessment if the patient has ongoing risk factors for HCV infection. In such cases, a quantitative HCV-RNA test rather than an HCV-antibody test is recommended to assess for HCV recurrence. I, A Surveillance for hepatocellular carcinoma is recommended for patients with cirrhosis,a in accordance with the AASLD guidance on the diagnosis, staging, and management of hepatocellular carcinoma. Strong, Moderateb For cirrhotic patients, upper endoscopic surveillance is recommended in accordance with the AASLD Guidanceb HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 9 of 14 Monitoring Patients Who Are Starting HCV Treatment, Are on Treatme Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommended Follow-Up for Patients Who Achieved a Sustained Virologic Response (SVR) guidance on portal hypertension bleeding in cirrhosis. Assessment for other causes of liver disease is recommended for patients who develop persistently abnormal liver tests after achieving SVR. I, C a For decompensated cirrhosis, please refer to the appropriate section. b Unlike the AASLD/IDSA HCV guidance, the AASLD guidelines use the GRADE system to rate recommendations; please see that document for further information about this rating system. Patients with undetectable serum HCV RNA, as assessed by a sensitive polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay, ≥12 weeks after treatment completion are deemed to have achieved SVR (ie, cure). The likelihood of achieving SVR with DAA therapy among adherent, immunologically competent, treatment-naive patients with compensated liver disease generally exceeds 95%. Among patients who achieved SVR with peginterferon/ribavirin treatment, more than 99% have remained free of HCV infection when followed for 5 years after treatment completion (Manns, 2013). Thus, achieving SVR is considered a virologic cure of HCV infection. SVR typically aborts progression of liver injury with regression of liver fibrosis in most (but not all) treated patients (Morgan, 2013); (Morisco, 2013); (Morgan, 2010); (Singal, 2010); (George, 2009). Liver fibrosis and liver function test results improve in most patients who achieve SVR (Morgan, 2013); (Morisco, 2013); (Morgan, 2010); (Singal, 2010); (George, 2009). Because of lack of progression, noncirrhotic patients who achieve SVR should receive standard medical care that is recommended for patients who were never infected with HCV unless they remain at risk for non-HCV–related liver disease, such as nonalcoholic fatty liver disease or alcoholic liver disease. Among cirrhotic patients who achieve SVR, decompensated liver disease (with the exception of hepatocellular carcinoma [HCC]) rarely develops during follow-up and overall survival is prolonged (Morgan, 2013); (Morisco, 2013); (Morgan, 2010 ); (Singal, 2010); (George, 2009). Bleeding from esophageal varices is rare after SVR (Morgan, 2013); (Morisco, 2013); (Morgan, 2010); (Singal, 2010); (George, 2009). Cirrhotic patients should undergo surveillance endoscopy every 2 years if known to have small varices and every 3 years in the absence of known varices in accordance with AASLD guidance on portal hypertension bleeding (Garcia-Tsao, 2017). Importantly, cirrhotic patients remain at risk for developing HCC and should, therefore, undergo surveillance for HCC every 6 months utilizing ultrasound (with or without AFP testing) despite the lowered risk that results after viral eradication (Marrero, 2018). Although multiple studies of cirrhotic patients who achieved SVR with peginterferon/ribavirin reported a reduction in the risk of developing HCC (Morgan, 2013); (Morisco, 2013); (Morgan, 2010); (Singal, 2010); (George, 2009 ) and a meta-analysis of persons achieving SVR with DAAs found that the HCC risk did not exceed that seen in patients who experienced SVR with interferon-based treatment after adjustment for baseline risk factors for HCC (Waziry, 2017b), one report found a higher than expected frequency of HCC in patients with HCV-related cirrhosis despite successful DAA treatment (Reig, 2016). However, a prospective observational study of 3045 cirrhotic patients found an adjusted hazard ratio for HCC of 0.57 (95% CI 0.40 to 0.81) following DAA-based therapy, implying a 43% reduction in HCC incidence (Carrat, 2019). Bleeding from esophageal varices is uncommon after SVR (Morgan, 2013); (Morisco, 2013); (Morgan, 2010); (Singal, 2010); (George, 2009). Nevertheless, patients with compensated cirrhosis who achieve SVR should continue to receive endoscopic surveillance for esophageal varices, in accordance with the AASLD guidance on portal hypertension bleeding (Garcia-Tsao, 2017). Current AASLD recommendations for patients with compensated cirrhosis without known varices is surveillance endoscopy every 2 years if there is evidence of ongoing liver injury from associated conditions, such as obesity or alcohol use, and every 3 years if liver injury is quiescent, such as after alcohol abstinence. Patients with compensated cirrhosis and known varices should undergo surveillance endoscopy annually if there is evidence of ongoing liver injury from associated conditions, such as obesity or alcohol use, and every 2 years if liver injury is quiescent, such as after alcohol abstinence. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 10 of 14 Monitoring Patients Who Are Starting HCV Treatment, Are on Treatme Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Patients in whom SVR is achieved but who have another potential cause of liver disease (eg, excessive alcohol use, metabolic syndrome with or without proven fatty liver disease, or iron overload) remain at risk for hepatic fibrosis progression. It is recommended that such patients be educated about the risk of liver disease and monitored for liver disease progression with periodic physical examination, blood tests, and potentially, tests for liver fibrosis by a liver disease specialist. Patients who achieve SVR can have HCV recurrence due to reinfection or late relapse (Sarrazin, 2017); (Simmons, 2016). A systematic review suggests 5-year recurrence risks of 1%, 11%, and 15% in low-risk HCV monoinfected, high-risk HCV monoinfected (ie, people who currently or formerly injected drugs, imprisonment, or men who have sex with men [MSM]), and HIV/HCV coinfected patients, respectively (Simmons, 2016). At least annual testing for HCV reinfection among patients with ongoing risk for HCV infection (eg, injection drug use or high-risk sexual exposure) is recommended. A flare in liver aminotransferase levels should prompt immediate evaluation for HCV reinfection (see Management of Acute HCV Infection). Because HCV antibody remains positive in most patients after achieving SVR, testing for HCV recurrence using an assay that detects HCV RNA (ie, quantitative HCV-RNA test) is recommended. Monitoring for HCV Infection During Chemotherapy and Immunosuppression NOT RECOMMENDED RATING Prospective monitoring for HCV recurrence among patients who achieved SVR and are receiving immunosuppressive drug therapy (eg, systemic corticosteroids, antimetabolites, chemotherapy, biologics agents, etc) is not routinely recommended. III, C Acute liver injury is common among patients receiving chemotherapy or immunosuppressive agents. Testing for hepatitis viruses should be included in the laboratory assessment of the cause of acute liver injury in these patients. Approximately 23% of patients with active HCV infection—especially those with a hematologic malignancy—experience a flare in their HCV RNA level (>10-fold) during chemotherapy. An ALT level increase is less common and clinical symptoms of hepatitis are uncommon (Torres, 2018). Among patients who have recovered from HCV infection, either spontaneously or with DAA treatment, reactivation of HCV infection (ie, detectable HCV RNA) during chemotherapy is distinctly uncommon and is not anticipated to occur since there is no residual reservoir for the virus. Thus, in this latter group, routine testing for HCV RNA during immunosuppressive treatment or prophylactic administration of antivirals during immunosuppressive treatment is not recommended. Additional Considerations If Treatment Includes Ribavirin Recommended Monitoring During Antiviral Therapy That Includes Ribavirin RECOMMENDED RATING More frequent assessment for drug-related adverse events (ie, CBC for patients receiving ribavirin) is recommended as clinically indicated. I, C HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 11 of 14 Monitoring Patients Who Are Starting HCV Treatment, Are on Treatme Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommended Monitoring for Pregnancy-Related Issues Prior to and During Antiviral Therapy That Includes Ribavirin RECOMMENDED RATING Women of childbearing potential and their partners should not receive ribavirin during or for at least 6 months prior to pregnancy. I, C Women of childbearing potential should be counseled not to become pregnant while receiving a ribavirin-containing antiviral regimen, and for at least 6 months after stopping the regimen. I, C Male partners of women of childbearing potential should be cautioned to prevent pregnancy while they are receiving a ribavirin-containing antiviral regimen, and for up to 6 months after stopping the regimen. I, C Serum pregnancy testing is recommended for women of childbearing potential prior to beginning treatment with a regimen that includes ribavirin. I, C Assessment of contraceptive use and of possible pregnancy is recommended at appropriate intervals during (and for 6 months after) ribavirin treatment for women of childbearing potential, and for female partners of men who receive ribavirin treatment. I, C Ribavirin causes hemolysis. Patients receiving ribavirin should have hemoglobin levels checked during treatment, often after 2 weeks, and the ribavirin dose reduced if the patient develops significant anemia, often defined as hemoglobin <10 g/dL. Ribavirin causes fetal death and fetal abnormalities in animals. Ribavirin should not be administered to pregnant women or to women who might become pregnant during or for 6 months after completing ribavirin treatment. Similarly, ribavirin may cause birth defects in offspring of women whose partner was receiving ribavirin when the woman became pregnant. In the very rare instances when ribavirin is used, it is imperative for persons of childbearing potential to use at least 2 reliable forms of effective contraception during treatment and for a period of 6 months thereafter. It is recommended that the healthcare practitioner document the discussion of the potential teratogenic effects of ribavirin in the patient’s medical record. Incomplete Adherence There are minimal data regarding the outcome of patients who have incomplete adherence to DAA therapy or the threshold level of adherence below which the incidence of SVR12 is significantly reduced. Missing doses of DAAs is relatively common. A secondary analysis of data from electronic blister packs that recorded the date and time of each dose among 103 participants in a velpatasvir/sofosbuvir clinical trial demonstrated that approximately one-third (32%) of study participants had <90% adherence (ie, nonadherence) (Cunningham, 2018). The most common episodes of nonadherence lasted 1–2 days (61% of episodes); 11% of episodes lasted ≥7 days. Despite the nonadherence, SVR12 was 94% among both DAA adherent (≥90% of doses) and nonadherent (<90% of doses) patients. Longer durations of missed treatment, however, may affect SVR. A study of patients receiving DAA treatment found that only 50% (2/4) patients with F0-F3 disease who took <4 weeks of their course of therapy experienced SVR, compared with an SVR of 99% (109/110) for those who received ≥4 weeks of therapy. Among patients with cirrhosis, a lower SVR12 rate was observed in those who took <8 weeks of therapy compared with participants who took ≥8 weeks (83% [25/30] vs 95% [209/221]) (Fabbiani, 2021). There are few data on which to base recommendations regarding how to manage patients who have discontinued DAAs for several days to weeks. The recommendations shown in Figure 1 are applicable to treatment-naive patients with acute or chronic HCV, without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis, receiving either glecaprevir/pibrentasvir or HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 12 of 14 Monitoring Patients Who Are Starting HCV Treatment, Are on Treatme Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) sofosbuvir/velpatasvir. These recommendations are based on the opinion of the AASLD-IDSA HCV Treatment Guidance Panel. Patients with prior DAA treatment, or receiving other DAA treatment regimens, or other populations (eg, patients who are posttransplant or have decompensated cirrhosis) should be managed in consultation with an expert. All patients with incomplete adherence should be asked about factors contributing to adherence or nonadherence, and counseled regarding the importance of adherence. In general, the panel considers a treatment interruption of <7 days unlikely to impact SVR12, based on adherence and outcome data from the SIMPLIFY study (Cunningham, 2018). Click the graphic to enlarge Figure 1. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 13 of 14 Monitoring Patients Who Are Starting HCV Treatment, Are on Treatme Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Last update: December 19, 2023 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 14 of 14 HCV Resistance Primer Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) HCV Resistance Primer Introduction Understanding principles of the emergence of drug-resistant viruses is critical when using targeted antiviral therapies. The best example of these principles can be gleaned from the study of HIV. Like HIV, HCV is an approximately 9.5 kilobase RNA virus that replicates very rapidly (billions of viruses daily). The production of each new virus is performed by an enzyme that results in 1 to 3 errors per replication cycle, on average. Many of these errors either have no effect on the progeny virus product or result in progeny viruses that are nonreplication competent (i.e., dead viruses). For some newly produced viruses, however, the transcription errors result in changes in critical coding regions that may, by chance, change the susceptibility of the virus to 1 or more drugs used to treat the virus. The emergence of such drug-resistant viruses most often occurs when drug levels are subtherapeutic, thereby creating selective pressure for the resistant viruses to emerge as the dominant species. These newly formed resistant viruses have a selective growth advantage that allows them to replicate in the presence of antiviral drugs. In a subset of patients with chronic HCV infection, viral variants harboring substitutions associated with resistance to HCV directing-acting antivirals (DAAs) are detectable prior to antiviral therapy and, particularly in the case of NS5A inhibitor-containing regimens, may negatively impact treatment response. These substitutions often are referred to as baseline resistance-associated substitutions (RASs). In the case of HCV DAAs, resistant viruses are also selected for and/or enriched in patients for whom a DAA regimen fails. These viruses contain substitutions that are designated as treatment-emergent (or treatment-selected) RASs. NS5A and NS3 RASs are frequently selected in patients with failure of NS5A or NS3 inhibitor-containing regimens, respectively. In contrast, NS5B nucleotide RASs are rarely detected (1% of failures) even after exposure to a failing DAA regimen containing a nucleotide inhibitor (Wyles, 2018b); (Svarovskaia, 2014). This is likely due to the highly conserved catalytic site region that nucleotides bind, making substitutions in this region extremely rare—often referred to as a high barrier to resistance—they are not rare because they do not occur but rather because any such substitution at this site would likely render the virus replication incompetent. Indeed, the specific RAS, S282T, does lead to sofosbuvir resistance but is extremely unfit so it is very rarely detected even after a failed sofosbuvir-containing regimen. When it is found, because of its low fitness level it quickly becomes rare in the population and effectively disappears. Accordingly, this particular RAS is often considered to not be clinically relevant and sofosbuvir may be used for therapy even when it is present. Compounding the clinical impact of NS5A RASs is their ability to maintain high replication competence (aka, relative fitness) in the absence of continued drug pressure, allowing them to remain the dominant viral quasispecies for prolonged periods (years) relative to NS3 protease or NS5B nucleotide polymerase inhibitor RASs, which are typically less fit and tend to disappear over several months, being overcome by more fit wild-type virus species. The magnitude of the negative impact of both baseline and selected RASs on treatment outcome varies according to regimen (i.e., coadministered drugs); patient factors that impact treatment response (e.g., cirrhosis); and the fold change decrease in potency conferred by the specific RAS(s). Given these considerations, RAS testing alone will not dictate optimal DAA regimen selection. In addition, a drug predicted to suffer a significant loss of potency in the presence of a RAS still may be used in specific clinical settings/regimens. Terminology, Thresholds of Clinical Relevance, and Assays Terminology 1. Naming Convention for Hepatitis C Proteins The hepatitis C genome codes for approximately 5 HCV-specific proteins, which are essential to: 1) form the viral HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 7 HCV Resistance Primer Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) structure (core and envelope proteins); 2) cut the HCV polyprotein; 3) provide enzymatic functions for replication and escape from the innate immune response (NS3/NS4A protease); 4) replicate the HCV RNA (NS5B RNA- dependent RNA polymerase); and 5) bind the HCV replication complex during replication and assembly (NS5A). 2. Polymorphism (Substitution) A reference (or consensus) nucleotide—and therefore amino acid sequence—has been defined for each HCV genotype. A polymorphism (or substitution) is a difference in an amino acid at a defined position of the HCV protein between a patient’s HCV and the reference HCV protein. Substitution is the preferred terminology among most experts. However, the US Food and Drug Administration currently uses the term polymorphism. To define a polymorphism, it is necessary to define: the HCV genotype (e.g., genotype 1, 2, 3, etc.) and subtype (e.g., 1a vs 1b); the HCV protein (e.g., NS5A); and the amino acid position (e.g., 93). Polymorphisms are reported as letter-number-letter (e.g., Y93H). The first letter refers to the amino acid typically expected for that position in the reference protein. The number refers to the amino acid position, and the final letter refers to the amino acid that is found in the patient’s HCV isolate. Thus, NS5A Y93H refers to amino acid position 93 of the NS5A protein. The amino acid at this position in the reference strain is Y (i.e., tyrosine) and the amino acid in the tested strain is H (i.e., histidine). For some patients, multiple variants are present and several amino acids may be found at a given position. Thus, it is possible to have a virus with NS5A Y93H/M. Such a patient would have viruses with the amino acids histidine (H) or methionine (M) at position 93 of the NS5A protein. 3. Resistance-Associated Substitutions A resistance-associated substitution describes any amino acid change from the consensus sequence at a position that has been associated with reduced susceptibility of a virus to 1 or more antiviral drugs. A specific RAS may or may not confer a phenotypic loss of susceptibility to other/multiple antiviral agents. 4. Drug-Class RASs Drug-class RASs are amino acid substitutions that reduce the susceptibility of a virus to any (and at least 1) member of a drug class or, alternatively, the viral variants with reduced susceptibility that carry these substitutions. Class RASs may or may not confer resistance to a specific drug in that class. 5. Drug-Specific RASs Drug-specific RASs are amino acid substitutions that reduce the susceptibility of a virus to a specific drug. When assessing the potential clinical impact of RASs on a given regimen, drug-specific RASs should be used. In an HCV-infected population not previously exposed to a DAA drug or class, drug-specific RASs will be found less frequently than class RASs. Thresholds of Clinical Relevance HCV resistance to DAAs is a rapidly evolving field with demonstrated clinical impact in specific situations with currently available DAA regimens. Presently, the most clinically significant RASs are in the NS5A position for genotypes 1a and 3. Data from clinical trials have demonstrated that RASs are commonly, but not always, found at the time of virologic failure. Viruses that are resistant to NS3/4A protease inhibitors seem to be less fit and may disappear from peripheral blood within a few weeks to months, whereas NS5A inhibitor-resistant viruses may persist for years, which could have implications for treatment and retreatment. In general, drug-specific RASs need to be present in at least 15% of the viruses of a given patient to reduce the likelihood of achieving SVR (Pawlotsky, 2016). Drug-specific RASs that are found at a lower frequency may not convey sufficient resistance to reduce SVR with currently available DAA regimens. Assays Methods to detect RASs include population sequencing (aka, Sanger sequencing) and deep sequencing (aka, next generation sequencing [NGS]). Both methods depend on sequencing the HCV RNA, calculating the amino acid sequence, and then inferring the presence of RASs. The methods differ in their sensitivity for detecting RASs. For the purposes of clinical care and decisions regarding which DAA regimen to use, both methods can be considered equivalent if a ≥15% HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 7 HCV Resistance Primer Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) cut point is used for determination of RASs by NGS. Recent studies have shown that NGS at a 1% level of sensitivity often result in the identification of additional RASs that are not associated with clinical failure (Zeuzem, 2017); (Sarrazin, 2016); (Jacobson, 2015b). 1. Genotypic Analysis a. Population-Based Sequencing (Sanger) Population sequencing of the HCV coding region of interest may be performed using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and standard Sanger sequencing of the bulk PCR product. The sensitivity for detection of resistance substitutions varies but is generally 15% to 25%. As a standard, substitutions are reported as differences compared with a genotype-specific, wild-type strain. b. Deep Sequencing Analysis NGS (deep sequencing approaches) can increase the sensitivity of detection for minor variants. After sequencing HCV coding regions using PCR, a software algorithm is used to process and align sequencing data via a multistep method to identify the substitutions present at a predetermined level. This level, or threshold, can vary but is often set as low as >1% for research purposes. To approximate results obtained by population sequencing, NGS thresholds are often set to ≥10%. 2. Phenotypic Analysis Phenotypic analysis involves laboratory techniques whereby the degree of drug resistance conferred by an amino acid change as well as the replicative capacity (fitness) of a particular RAS can be estimated in the presence of a wild-type or consensus strain. These research techniques are not routinely used for clinical practice. To assess the level of resistance, RASs are typically introduced as point mutations into the backbone of an existing standard HCV genome within an existing cell culture/replicon or enzyme-based assay. Isolates harboring these RASs are then challenged by appropriate antiviral agents at increasing concentrations and fold changes—based on EC50 or IC50 and EC90 or IC90 values—are determined for inhibition of replication or enzyme activity, respectively, in comparison to wild-type virus. Comparison of replication levels for variants and wild-type constructs in the absence of drug allows for estimation of fitness. 3. Assay Summary Points Either population sequencing or deep sequencing can be used to detect the presence of RASs in NS3, NS5A, and NS5B. For clinical decisions, population sequencing or deep sequencing with at least 15% prevalence of RASs as the cutoff is recommended. The presence of RASs with <15% prevalence should not be considered clinically significant. When assessing the potential clinical effect of RASs, it is important to determine the drug-specific RASs. Resistance Testing in Clinical Practice Regimen-Specific Recommendations for Use of RAS Testing in Clinical Practice RECOMMENDED RATING Elbasvir/grazoprevir NS5A RAS testing is recommended for genotype 1a-infected, treatment-naive or -experienced patients being considered for elbasvir/grazoprevir. If present, a different regimen should be considered. I, A Ledipasvir/sofosbuvir NS5A RAS testing can be considered for genotype 1a-infected, treatment-experienced patients with and without cirrhosis being considered for ledipasvir/sofosbuvir. If clinically importanta resistance is present, a different recommended therapy should be used. I, A HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 7 HCV Resistance Primer Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Regimen-Specific Recommendations for Use of RAS Testing in Clinical Practice Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir NS5A RAS testing is recommended for genotype 3-infected, treatment-naive patients with cirrhosis and treatment-experienced patients (without cirrhosis) being considered for 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir. If Y93H is present, weight-based ribavirin should be added or another recommended regimen should be used. I, A a Clinically important = ≥100-fold shift in the in vitro EC50 to ledipasvir Resistance testing is most important in clinical practice when the results would modify treatment management by impacting the duration of therapy and/or inclusion of ribavirin, or result in selection of alternative therapy. Unfortunately the utility of RAS testing at this time varies by both patient characteristics and DAA regimen. Approaches to Overcome Resistance Data for currently approved DAAs provide limited insight on optimal retreatment approaches for patients with a previous DAA therapy failure and high fold change RASs, particularly those in NS5A. Until regimens combining multiple drugs predicted to be active (based on the available resistance profile) are available and adequate phase 2/3 studies in DAA treatment failure populations are accomplished, other aspects of therapy must be optimized in treatment-experienced patients with RASs. In general, optimization involves appropriately characterizing the patient along with use of an extended duration of therapy and the addition of ribavirin (unless an absolute contraindication to ribavirin exists). Characterizing Patients at Risk The characteristics that increase the risk of DAA treatment failure are different for each oral regimen. Thus, understanding the population at risk is imperative. Generally, this requires accurate assessment of liver fibrosis and clarification of prior therapy. Virus Determination of HCV genotype, subtype, and baseline RASs may be necessary to fully characterize a patient’s risk for therapeutic failure and optimize the treatment approach. Treatment Duration The duration of therapy should always be optimized to attain a cure. Although short-duration therapy has been associated with a higher chance of relapse, careful selection of patients for shortened therapy may minimize relapse risk and lead to significant cost savings. In contrast, extension of therapy (often to 24 weeks) in conjunction with the addition of ribavirin has been associated with reasonable SVR rates during retreatment of patients with past DAA therapy failure, even in the presence of significant drug-specific RASs prior to retreatment (Gane, 2017); (Cooper, 2016). Ribavirin The addition of ribavirin increases SVR in patient populations with an increased risk for treatment failure (e.g., decompensated cirrhosis). It also improves SVR rates among patients with baseline NS5A RASs and prior DAA treatment failure. Complementary Therapy Although data are limited, patients with multiclass RASs can achieve SVR by combining triple or quadruple drug class regimens (see section on retreatment in prior DAA failure). This approach may become less necessary with the approval of standalone dual- or triple-drug regimens composed of second-generation protease and NS5A inhibitors with improved activity against common RASs. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 4 of 7 HCV Resistance Primer Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Considerations With Current Antiviral Regimens Elbasvir/Grazoprevir Elbasvir/grazoprevir is indicated for treatment-naive and -experienced patients with genotype 1 or 4. The presence of NS3 RASs has no significant impact on SVR12 in patients treated with elbasvir/grazoprevir. The presence of NS5A RASs has no significant impact in genotype 1b infection. In treatment-naive, genotype 1a patients (with or without cirrhosis) treated with 12 weeks of therapy, the presence of NS3 RASs has no impact (Zeuzem, 2015). In treatment-naive or prior relapse patients treated for 12 weeks with elbasvir/grazoprevir without ribavirin, the presence of high fold change NS5A RASs (at amino acid positions 28, 30, 31, and 93) decreased SVR to 58% (14/24) compared to 98% SVR in those without NS5A RASs. The presence of NS5A RASs had a similar impact on treatment-experienced patients (with or without cirrhosis) who received 12 weeks of elbasvir/grazoprevir without ribavirin (SVR12 29% vs 97%, respectively) (Jacobson, 2015b). Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir In a study of the resistance profiles of glecaprevir and pibrentasvir using cell cultures (Ng, 2017), selection of genotypes 1a, 1b, 2a, 3a, 4a, and 6a replicons for reduced susceptibility to glecaprevir resulted in the emergence of RASs at A156 or D/Q168. The A156 RAS resulted in the greatest reductions (>100-fold) in glecaprevir susceptibility. The D/Q168 RAS had varying effects on glecaprevir susceptibility depending on genotype/subtype and specific amino acid change. The greatest reductions (>30-fold) were observed in genotypes 1a (D168F/Y), 3a (Q168R), and 6a (D168A/G/H/V/Y). These RASs, however, are rarely detected clinically. Pibrentasvir selected no viable colonies in genotype 1b, 2b, 4a, 5a, and 6a. Of the few RASs selected by pibrentasvir, Y93H/N conferred <7-fold resistance. The presence of baseline RASs had minimal impact on SVR rates with glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in registration trials that predominantly enrolled noncirrhotic patients. In a pooled analysis of NS3/4A protease inhibitor- and NS5A inhibitor-naive patients who received glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in phase 2 and 3 studies (Asselah, 2018b); (Kwo, 2017b); (Forns, 2017); (Foster, 2017); (Zeuzem, 2016), baseline RASs in patients with genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 infection had no impact on SVR12 (Krishnan, 2018). Among treatment-naive genotype 3 patients without cirrhosis who received glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for 8 weeks, the A30K polymorphism was detected in 10%, of whom 78% achieved SVR12. There are insufficient data to characterize the impact of A30K in genotype 3 patients with cirrhosis or prior treatment experience. All genotype 3 patients with Y93H prior to treatment achieved SVR12. Ledipasvir/Sofosbuvir Several comprehensive analyses of genotype 1 patients treated with ledipasvir/sofosbuvir in phase 2 and phase 3 studies have helped clarify the impact of baseline RASs on SVR rates with this regimen (Zeuzem, 2017); (Sarrazin, 2016). In a pooled analysis of patients with genotype 1a or 1b who received ledipasvir/sofosbuvir, 93.5% (316/338) of those with baseline NS5A RASs achieved SVR12 compared to an SVR12 of 98.4% (1,741/1,770) in patients without baseline NS5A RASs (Sarrazin, 2016). In this analysis, the reduction in SVR was driven predominantly by patients with genotype 1a NS5A RASs. The SVR12 rates for genotype 1a patients with and without NS5A RASs were 92.3% and 98.3%, respectively. A slightly lower SVR12 of 90% was observed for genotype 1a patients with NS5A RASs using a 15% deep sequencing cutoff value. Notably, other factors further delineated populations at risk for relapse in this analysis, including high-level baseline NS5A RASs (>100-fold resistance with Q30H/R, L31M/V, and Y93C/H/N in genotype 1a) and a shorter duration therapy (8 weeks or 12 weeks vs 24 weeks). SVR12 rates were 97.4% to 100% in treatment-experienced patients without NS5A RASs or with RASs with <100-fold resistance treated with ledipasvir/sofosbuvir for 12 weeks or 24 weeks. When RASs with >100-fold resistance were present, however, SVR12 dropped to 64.7% (11/17) with 12 weeks of therapy compared to 100% (6/6) with 24 weeks of therapy. In this small subset of patients, the addition of ribavirin did not appear to offer the same benefit as extension of therapy to 24 weeks in this pooled analysis. SVR12 was 81.8% in those with >100-fold NS5A resistance who received 12 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir with ribavirin. In contrast, in the SIRIUS trial, all 8 treatment-experienced cirrhotic patients with >100-fold resistance treated for 12 weeks with ledipasvir/sofosbuvir plus ribavirin achieved SVR12. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 5 of 7 HCV Resistance Primer Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir is a pangenotypic therapy indicated for treatment-naive and -experienced patients with or without cirrhosis. In the ASTRAL studies, the presence of NS5A RASs had no impact on SVR12 for patients with genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 infection treated with 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir (Hézode, 2018). The presence of Y93H in genotype 3 patients decreased the SVR12 to 84% (21/25 patients) compared to 97% (242/249) in those without this RAS (Foster, 2015a). This appeared to be more impactful in patients with cirrhosis and/or prior treatment experience with an interferon- based regimen. Ribavirin was not used in these trials. However, a subsequent trial that randomized patients with genotype 3 and cirrhosis to sofosbuvir/velpatasvir with or without ribavirin demonstrated lower relapse rates in patients receiving ribavirin, but the difference was only relevant in those with baseline Y93H RASs prior to therapy (Esteban, 2018). Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir/Voxilaprevir Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir fills an important role as a pangenotypic regimen for patients who have experienced treatment failure with DAA therapy. Although data are limited, the presence of NS3, NS5A, or NS5B RASs prior to treatment did not influence the likelihood of SVR12, and 12 weeks of treatment produced a high SVR12 (96%) in DAA- experienced patients. RAS testing has not been demonstrated to impact SVR rates with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir therapy (Sarrazin, 2018); (Bourlière, 2017). Table 1. Most Common, Clinically Important RASs by DAA, Genotype, and Fold Change DAA Genotype 1a Genotype 1b Genotype 3a M28T Q30R L31M/V Y93H/N L31V/I Y93H/N A30K Y93H Ledipasvir 20x >100x >100x / >100x >1000x / >10,000x >100x >100x / -- NA NA >50x Elbasvir 20x >100x >10x >1000x / >1000x <10x >100x / -- 50x >100x >100x Velpatasvi r <10x <3x 20x / 50x >100x / >1000x <3x <3x / -- 50x >100x Pibrentasv ir <3x <3x <3x <10x <3x <3x <3x <3x Color Key: light green = <3-fold change; dark green = <10-fold change; orange = >10- to 100-fold change; pink = >100-fold change Table 2. Clinically Important RASs by DAA Regimen and Genotype DAA Regimen Genotype 1a 1b 3 Ledipasvir/sofosbuvir Q30H/R L31M/V Y93C/H/N L31V ?Y93H NA Elbasvir/grazoprevir M28A/T Q30H/R Y93H NA HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 6 of 7 HCV Resistance Primer Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) DAA Regimen Genotype 1a 1b 3 L31M/V Y93C/H/N Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir NA NA Y93H Glecaprevir/pibrentasvir NA NA A30K Table 3. NS5A RAS Testing Recommendations Prior to Initiation of DAA Treatment Among Genotype 1 Patients by DAA Regimen, Virus Subtype, Prior Treatment Status, and Cirrhosis Status DAA Regimen 1b TNa or TEb 1a TN 1a TE No Cirrhosis 1a TE Cirrhosis 3 TN Cirrhosis 3 TE No Cirrhosis Ledipasvir/sof osbuvir No No Yes Yes N/A N/A Elbasvir/grazo previr No Yes Yes Yes N/A N/A Sofosbuvir/vel patasvir No No No No Yes Yes Glecaprevir/pi brentasvir No No No No No No a TN = treatment naive b TE = treatment experienced Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 7 of 7 Initial Treatment of Adults with HCV Infection Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Initial Treatment of Adults with HCV Infection Initial treatment of HCV infection includes patients with chronic hepatitis C who have not been previously treated with interferon, peginterferon, ribavirin, or any HCV direct-acting antiviral (DAA) agent, whether investigational, or US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved. Simplification of the treatment regimen may expand the number of healthcare professionals who prescribe antiviral therapy and increase the number of persons treated. This would align with the National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine strategy to reduce cases of chronic HCV infection by 90% by 2030 (NAS, 2017). Simplified Pangenotypic HCV Treatment for Treatment-Naive Adults Without Cirrhosis Simplified Pangenotypic HCV Treatment Algorithm for Treatment-Naive Adults With Compensated Cirrhosis The level of evidence available to inform the best regimen for each patient and the strength of the recommendation vary and are rated accordingly (see Methods Table 2). In addition, specific recommendations are given when treatment differs for a particular group (eg, those infected with different genotypes). Recommended regimens are those that are favored for most patients in a given group, based on optimal efficacy, favorable tolerability and toxicity profiles, and treatment duration. Alternative regimens are those that are effective but, relative to recommended regimens, have potential disadvantages, limitations for use in certain patient populations, or less supporting data than recommended regimens. In certain situations, an alternative regimen may be an optimal regimen for an individual patient or clinical setting. Specific considerations for pediatric patients and persons with HIV/HCV coinfection, decompensated cirrhosis (moderate or severe hepatic impairment; Child-Turcotte- Pugh [CTP] class B or C), HCV infection post liver transplant, and severe renal impairment, end-stage renal disease (ESRD), or post kidney transplant are addressed in other sections of the guidance. Recommended and alternative regimens are listed by pan-genotypic activity and in order of level of evidence. When several regimens are at the same recommendation level, they are listed in alphabetical order. Regimen choice should be determined based on patient-specific data, including drug-drug interactions. Patients receiving antiviral therapy require careful pretreatment assessment for comorbidities that may influence treatment response or regimen selection. All patients should have access to an HCV care provider during treatment, although preset clinic visits and/or blood tests depend on the treatment regimen and may not be required for all regimens/patients. Patients receiving ribavirin require additional monitoring for anemia during treatment (see Monitoring section). The following pages include guidance for management of treatment-naive patients by genotype (although most patients will fall into the simplified treatment algorithms above). Genotype 1 Genotype 2 Genotype 3 Genotype 4 Genotype 5 or 6 Mixed Genotypes Rarely, genotyping assays may indicate the presence of a mixed infection (eg, genotypes 1a and 2). Treatment data for mixed genotypes with DAAs are sparse but utilization of a pangenotypic regimen is recommended in this circumstance (Chiu, 2020). When the correct combination or duration of treatment is unclear, expert consultation should be sought. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 2 Initial Treatment of Adults with HCV Infection Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 2 Simplified HCV Treatment* for Treatment-Naive Adults Without Cirrhos Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Simplified HCV Treatment* for Treatment-Naive Adults Without Cirrhosis Who Is NOT Eligible for Simplified Treatment (Without Cirrhosis) Patients who have any of the following characteristics: Prior hepatitis C treatment Cirrhosis (see simplified treatment for treatment-naive adults with compensated cirrhosis) HBsAg positive Current pregnancy Known or suspected hepatocellular carcinoma Prior liver transplantation (see HCV guidance for treatment recommendations for these patients) Who Is Eligible for Simplified Treatment Adults with chronic hepatitis C (any genotype) who do not have cirrhosis and have not previously received hepatitis C treatment Pretreatment Assessment* Calculate FIB-4 score. Cirrhosis assessment: Liver biopsy is not required. For the purpose of this guidance, a patient is presumed to have cirrhosis if they have a FIB-4 score >3.25 or any of the following findings from a previously performed test. Transient elastography indicating cirrhosis (eg, FibroScan stiffness >12.5 kPa) Noninvasive serologic tests above proprietary cutoffs indicating cirrhosis (eg, FibroSure, Enhanced Liver Fibrosis Test, etc) Clinical evidence of cirrhosis (eg, liver nodularity and/or splenomegaly on imaging, platelet count <150,000/mm3, etc) Prior liver biopsy showing cirrhosis Medication reconciliation: Record current medications, including over-the-counter drugs and herbal/dietary supplements. Potential drug-drug interaction assessment: Drug-drug interactions can be assessed using the AASLD/IDSA guidance or the University of Liverpool drug interaction checker. Drug-drug interactions are particularly important in HIV co-infection In those with HIV, the simplified treatment approach should not be used in those on TDF containing regimens with eGFR <60 ml/min because of the need of additional monitoring. Education: Educate the patient about proper administration of medications, adherence, and prevention of reinfection. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 3 Simplified HCV Treatment* for Treatment-Naive Adults Without Cirrhos Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Pretreatment laboratory testing: Within 6 months of initiating treatment: Complete blood count (CBC) Hepatic function panel (ie, albumin, total and direct bilirubin, alanine aminotransferase [ALT], aspartate aminotransferase [AST]) Calculated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) Any time prior to starting antiviral therapy: Quantitative HCV RNA (HCV viral load) HIV antigen/antibody test Hepatitis B surface antigen Before initiating antiviral therapy: Serum pregnancy testing and counseling about pregnancy risks of HCV medication should be offered to women of childbearing age. Recommended Regimens* Glecaprevir (300 mg) / pibrentasvir (120 mg) to be taken with food for a duration of 8 weeks Sofosbuvir (400 mg) / velpatasvir (100 mg) for a duration of 12 weeks On-Treatment Monitoring Inform patients taking diabetes medication of the potential for symptomatic hypoglycemia. Monitoring for hypoglycemia is recommended. Inform patients taking warfarin of the potential for changes in their anticoagulation status. Monitoring INR for subtherapeutic anticoagulation is recommended. No laboratory monitoring is required for other patients. An in-person or telehealth/phone visit may be scheduled, if needed, for patient support, assessment of symptoms, and/or new medications. Post-Treatment Assessment of Cure (SVR) Assessment of quantitative HCV RNA and a hepatic function panel are recommended 12 weeks or later following completion of therapy to confirm HCV RNA is undetectable (virologic cure) and transaminase normalization. Assessment for other causes of liver disease is recommended for patients with elevated transaminase levels after achieving SVR. Follow-Up After Achieving Virologic Cure (SVR) No liver-related follow-up is recommended for noncirrhotic patients who achieve SVR. Patients with ongoing risk for HCV infection (eg, intravenous drug use or MSM engaging in unprotected sex) should be counseled about risk reduction, and tested for HCV RNA annually and whenever they develop elevated ALT, AST, or bilirubin. Advise patients to avoid excess alcohol use. Follow-Up for Patients Who Do Not Achieve a Virologic Cure Patients in whom initial HCV treatment fails to achieve cure (SVR) should be evaluated for retreatment by a specialist, in accordance with AASLD/IDSA guidance. Until retreatment occurs, assessment for disease progression every 6 to 12 months with a hepatic function panel, CBC, and INR is recommended. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 3 Simplified HCV Treatment* for Treatment-Naive Adults Without Cirrhos Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Advise patients to avoid excess alcohol use. *More detailed descriptions of the patient evaluation process and antivirals used for HCV treatment, including the treatment of patients with cirrhosis, can be found here. a FIB-4 is a noninvasive measure of hepatic fibrosis that is calculated by: (age [years] x AST [U/L]) ÷ (platelet count [109/ (ALT1/2 [U/L])). b A patient is presumed to have cirrhosis if they have a FIB-4 score >3.25 or if they any of the following from a previously performed test: (1) transient elastography indicating cirrhosis (ie, liver stiffness >12.5 kPa); (2) noninvasive serologic tes above the proprietary cutoff indicating cirrhosis (eg, FibroSure, Enhanced Liver Fibrosis Test); (3) clinical evidence of cir (eg, liver nodularity and/or splenomegaly on imaging, platelet count <150,000/mm3); or (4) prior liver biopsy showing cirr c Medication reconciliation should record currently prescribed medications, over-the-counter drugs, and herbal/dietary supplements. d Drug-drug interaction assessment should be performed using the table in the monitoring section of the HCV guidance w or the University of Liverpool drug interaction checker. Last update: December 19, 2023 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 3 Simplified HCV Treatment Algorithm for Treatment-Naive Adults With C Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Simplified HCV Treatment Algorithm for Treatment-Naive Adults With Compensated Cirrhosis Who Is NOT Eligible for Simplified Treatment (With Cirrhosis) Patients who have any of the following characteristics: Current or prior episode of decompensated cirrhosis, defined as Child-Turcotte-Pugh (CTP) score ≥7 (ascites, hepatic encephalopathy, total bilirubin >2.0 mg/dL, albumin ≤3.5 g/dL, or INR ≥1.7) Prior hepatitis C treatment End-stage renal disease (ie, eGFR <30 mL/min/m2) (see Patients with Renal Impairment section) HBsAg positive Current pregnancy Known or suspected hepatocellular carcinoma Prior liver transplantation (see HCV guidance for treatment recommendations for these patients) Who Is Eligible for Simplified Treatment Adults with chronic hepatitis C (any genotype) who have compensated cirrhosis (Child-Pugh A) and have not previously received hepatitis C treatment Liver biopsy is not required. For the purpose of this guidance, a patient is presumed to have cirrhosis if they have a FIB-4 score >3.25 or any of the following findings from a previously performed test. Transient elastography indicating cirrhosis (eg, FibroScan stiffness >12.5 kPa) Noninvasive serologic tests above proprietary cutoffs indicating cirrhosis (eg, FibroSure, Enhanced Liver Fibrosis Test, etc) Clinical evidence of cirrhosis (eg, liver nodularity and/or splenomegaly on imaging, platelet count <150,000/mm3, etc) Prior liver biopsy showing cirrhosis Pretreatment Assessment* Calculate FIB-4 score. Calculate CTP score: Patients with a CTP score ≥7 (ie, CTP B or C) have decompensated cirrhosis and this simplified treatment approach is not recommended. Ultrasound of the liver (conducted within the prior 6 months): Evaluate to exclude HCC and subclinical ascites. Medication reconciliation: Record current medications, including over-the-counter drugs and herbal/dietary supplements. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 4 Simplified HCV Treatment Algorithm for Treatment-Naive Adults With C Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Potential drug-drug interaction assessment: Drug-drug interactions can be assessed using the AASLD/IDSA guidance or the University of Liverpool drug interaction checker. Drug-drug interactions are particularly important in HIV co-infection In those with HIV, the simplified treatment approach should not be used in those on TDF containing regimens with eGFR <60 ml/min because of the need of additional monitoring. Education: Educate the patient about proper administration of medications, adherence, and prevention of reinfection. Pretreatment laboratory testing: Within 3 months of initiating treatment: Complete blood count (CBC) International normalized ratio (INR) Hepatic function panel (ie, albumin, total and direct bilirubin, alanine aminotransferase [ALT], aspartate aminotransferase [AST]) Calculated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) Any time prior to starting antiviral therapy: Quantitative HCV RNA (HCV viral load) HIV antigen/antibody test Hepatitis B surface antigen HCV genotype (if treating with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir) Before initiating antiviral therapy: Serum pregnancy testing and counseling about pregnancy risks of HCV medication should be offered to women of childbearing age. Recommended Regimens* Genotype 1-6: Glecaprevir (300 mg) / pibrentasvir (120 mg) to be taken with food for a duration of 8 weeks Genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 Sofosbuvir (400 mg) / velpatasvir (100 mg) for a duration of 12 weeks NOTE: Patients with genotype 3 require baseline NS5A resistance-associated substitution (RAS) testing. Those without Y93H can be treated with 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir. If Y93H is present, see HCV guidance for treatment recommendations. On-Treatment Monitoring Providers may order blood tests to monitor for liver injury during treatment because hepatic decompensation (eg, jaundice, etc) occurs rarely among patients with cirrhosis receiving HCV antiviral treatment. Patients should see a specialist if they develop worsening liver blood tests (eg, bilirubin, AST, ALT, etc); jaundice, ascites, or encephalopathy; or new liver-related symptoms. Inform patients taking diabetes medication of the potential for symptomatic hypoglycemia. Monitoring for hypoglycemia is recommended. Inform patients taking warfarin of the potential for changes in their anticoagulation status. Monitoring INR for subtherapeutic anticoagulation is recommended. An in-person or telehealth/phone visit may be scheduled, if needed, for patient support, assessment of symptoms, and/or new medications. Post-Treatment Assessment of Cure (SVR) Assessment of quantitative HCV RNA and a hepatic function panel are recommended 12 weeks or later following completion of therapy to confirm HCV RNA is undetectable (virologic cure) and transaminase normalization. Assessment for other causes of liver disease is recommended for patients with elevated transaminase levels after HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 4 Simplified HCV Treatment Algorithm for Treatment-Naive Adults With C Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) achieving SVR. Follow-Up After Achieving Virologic Cure (SVR) Ultrasound surveillance for HCC (with or without alpha-fetoprotein testing) every 6 months is recommended for patients with cirrhosis in accordance with AASLD guidance. Upper endoscopic surveillance for esophageal varices is recommended in accordance with AASLD guidance on portal hypertensive bleeding in cirrhosis. Patients with ongoing risk for HCV infection (eg, intravenous drug use or MSM engaging in unprotected sex) should be counseled about risk reduction, and tested for HCV RNA annually and whenever they develop elevated ALT, AST, or bilirubin. Patients should abstain from alcohol to avoid progression of liver disease. Follow-Up for Patients Who Do Not Achieve a Virologic Cure Patients in whom initial HCV treatment fails to achieve cure (SVR) should be evaluated for retreatment by a specialist, in accordance with AASLD/IDSA guidance. Ultrasound surveillance for hepatocellular carcinoma (with or without alpha-fetoprotein testing) every 6 months is recommended for patients with cirrhosis, in accordance with AASLD guidance. Assessment for disease progression every 6 to 12 months with a hepatic function panel, CBC, creatinine, and INR is recommended. Patients should abstain from alcohol to avoid progression of liver disease. *More detailed descriptions of the patient evaluation process and antivirals used for HCV treatment can be found here. a Child-Pugh score based on presence of ascites, hepatic encephalopathy, total bilirubin >2.0 mg/dL, albumin ≤3.5 g/dL, ≥1.7. Patients with a Child-Pugh score ≥7 (ie, Child-Pugh B or C) have decompensated cirrhosis; this simplified treatmen approach is not recommended for patients with decompensated cirrhosis. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 4 Simplified HCV Treatment Algorithm for Treatment-Naive Adults With C Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) b Obtain liver ultrasound within 6 months prior to initiating antiviral treatment to exclude hepatocellular carcinoma and su ascites. This simplified treatment approach is not recommended for patients with hepatocellular carcinoma and/or decom cirrhosis. c Medication reconciliation should record currently prescribed medications, over-the-counter drugs, and herbal/dietary supplements. d Drug-drug interaction assessment should be performed using the table in the monitoring section of the HCV guidance w the University of Liverpool drug interaction checker. e Development of jaundice, ascites, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, variceal hemorrhage, or hepatic encephalopathy m suggest hepatic decompensation. Patients should be referred to a specialist if they develop worsening liver blood tests (e bilirubin, AST, ALT, INR), jaundice, ascites, encephalopathy, or new liver-related symptoms). f Ultrasound surveillance for hepatocellular carcinoma (with or without alpha-fetoprotein testing) every 6 months is recom for patients with cirrhosis, in accordance with AASLD guidance. g See AASLD guidance for recommendations regarding the evaluation and management of varices. Last update: December 19, 2023 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 4 of 4 Treatment-Naive Genotype 1 Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Treatment-Naive Genotype 1 Three highly potent DAA combination regimens are recommended for patients with genotype 1 infection, although there are differences in the recommended regimens based on the HCV subtype, the presence or absence of baseline NS5A resistance-associated substitutions (RASs), and the presence or absence of compensated cirrhosis. With certain regimens, patients with genotype 1a may have higher virologic failure rates than those with genotype 1b. Genotype 1 infection that cannot be subtyped should be treated as genotype 1a infection. Approximately 10% to 15% of genotype 1-infected patients without prior exposure to NS5A inhibitors have detectable NS5A RASs prior to treatment. The clinical impact of NS5A RASs varies across regimens and baseline patient characteristics. In patients with genotype 1a infection, the presence of baseline NS5A RASs that cause a large reduction in the activity of NS5A inhibitors (>5 fold) adversely impacts response to some NS5A inhibitor-containing regimens (Zeuzem, 2017); (Jacobson, 2015b). These RASs are found by population sequencing in roughly 5% to 10% of patients and relevant RASs vary by DAA regimen. Given that baseline NS5A RASs are one of the strongest pretreatment predictors of therapeutic response with certain regimens in those with genotype 1a infection, testing for these RASs prior to deciding on a therapeutic course is recommended in select situations (Zeuzem, 2015c). In clinical settings where RAS testing is unavailable, regimens for which the presence of specific RAS(s) factor into treatment selection should be avoided. For further guidance, please see the HCV Resistance Primer section. Compared to interferon-based therapy, DAAs are associated with a higher rate of drug-drug interactions with concomitant medications. Thus, attention to drug interactions is an important treatment consideration (see Drug Interactions table). The product prescribing information and other resources (eg, http://www.hep-druginteractions.org) should be referenced regularly to ensure safety when prescribing DAA regimens. Important interactions with commonly used medications (eg, antacids, lipid-lowering drugs, anti-epileptics, antiretrovirals, etc) exist for all the regimens discussed. The following pages include guidance for management of treatment-naive patients with genotype 1 infection. Treatment-Naive Genotype 1a Without Cirrhosis Treatment-Naive Genotype 1b Without Cirrhosis Treatment-Naive Genotype 1a With Compensated Cirrhosis Treatment-Naive Genotype 1b With Compensated Cirrhosis Simplified HCV Treatment for Treatment-Naive Adults Without Cirrhosis Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 1 Treatment-Naive Genotype 1a Without Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Treatment-Naive Genotype 1a Without Cirrhosis Recommended and alternative regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for: Treatment-Naive Genotype 1a Patients Without Cirrhosis RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg)a 8 weeks I, A Daily fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) 12 weeks I, A Daily fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) for patients who are HIV-uninfected and whose HCV RNA level is <6 million IU/mL 8 weeks I, B Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) 12 weeks I, A ALTERNATIVE DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of elbasvir (50 mg)/grazoprevir (100 mg) 12 weeks I, A a Dosing is 3 coformulated tablets (glecaprevir [100 mg]/pibrentasvir [40 mg]) taken once daily. Please refer to the prescribing information. Recommended Regimens Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir The daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg) is administered as three 100 mg/40 mg fixed-dose combination pills. Based on favorable data for 8 weeks of treatment among noncirrhotic patients in the phase 2 SURVEYOR-1 study (33/34 patients with SVR and no virologic failures) (Kwo, 2017b), ENDURANCE-1 enrolled 703 noncirrhotic, genotype 1 patients who were DAA-naive or in whom a previous interferon-based regimen failed. Participants were randomized to receive 8 or 12 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir (Zeuzem, 2018). Of those enrolled, 43% had genotype 1a, 85% had fibrosis stage 0 or 1, and 62% were treatment naive. Overall SVR12 rates for the intention-to-treat population were 99% (348/351) in the 8-week arm and 99.7% (351/352) in the 12-week arm. The 8-week arm met the predefined study criteria for noninferiority to the 12-week arm. A single patient experienced on-treatment virologic failure in this study (genotype 1a, day 29). Notably, there were no documented relapses in either study arm. EXPEDITION-1 investigated the use of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in DAA-naive (75%) or -experienced (interferon or peginterferon ± ribavirin, or sofosbuvir plus ribavirin ± peginterferon) patients with compensated cirrhosis. Of 146 patients with genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 given 12 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir, 145 (99%) achieved SVR12. The single relapse occurred in a genotype 1a patient; SVR for genotype 1a was 98% (47/48) (Forns, 2017). HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 4 Treatment-Naive Genotype 1a Without Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) EXPEDITION-2, a study of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in 153 HIV/HCV-coinfected adults with genotype 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6, utilized 8 weeks of treatment for noncirrhotic patients and 12 weeks for cirrhotic patients (the recommended durations approved by the FDA). The overall SVR12 was 98% and there were no observed virologic failures among the 94 patients with genotype 1 infection (Rockstroh, 2017). In EXPEDITION-1 and EXPEDITION-2, neither subtype (1a vs 1b) nor the presence of baseline RASs impacted SVR12 results in DAA-naive genotype 1 patients. In an integrated analysis of 602 DAA-naive, noncirrhotic patients with genotype 1 infection treated with 8 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in 6 phase 2 or 3 clinical trials, SVR12 was 99.2% (597/602) (Naganuma, 2019). Real-world cohorts from Germany (63% genotype 1a) and Italy (32% genotype 1a) show similarly high efficacy in treatment-naive, noncirrhotic patients with genotype 1 infection treated with 8 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir. Using a modified intention- to-treat analysis (excluding those not completing treatment or lost to follow-up), SVR was 100% in both the German (228/228) (Berg, 2019) and the Italian (307/307) (D’Ambrosio, 2019) cohorts. Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir The fixed-dose combination of 12 weeks of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) was approved by the FDA for the treatment of genotype 1 infection in treatment-naive patients based on ASTRAL-1. This placebo-controlled trial involved a 12-week course of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir administered to 624 participants with genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 who were treatment naive (n=423) or previously treated with interferon-based therapy, with or without ribavirin or a protease inhibitor (n=201) (Feld, 2015). Of the 328 genotype 1 patients included, 323 achieved SVR with no difference observed by subtype (98% 1a; 99% 1b). Of 121 participants (all genotypes) classified as having cirrhosis, 120 achieved SVR (99%). The presence of baseline NS5A RASs (at 15% cutoff)—reported in 11% of genotype 1a and 18% of genotype 1b participant samples tested—did not influence SVR12 rate for genotype 1 (Hézode, 2018). Of the 2 virologic failures in ASTRAL-1 (<1% of treated participants), both were genotype 1 and had baseline RASs. There was no significant difference in the rates of adverse events in the sofosbuvir/velpatasvir vs placebo groups. The phase 3 POLARIS-2 study randomized 941 DAA-naive patients with genotype 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 infection—with or without compensated cirrhosis—to receive 8 weeks of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/voxilaprevir (100mg) or 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir (Jacobson, 2017). Of participants treated with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir for 12 weeks, 170/172 (99%) with genotype 1a and 57/59 (97%) with genotype 1b achieved SVR12 with a single relapse observed with each subtype. In a single-arm, phase 3 study from Asia that included 375 treatment-naive and -experienced patients with genotype 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 infection (18% with cirrhosis) treated with 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir, SVR was achieved in 95% (362/375) (Wei, 2019). Of the 129 participants with genotype 1 infection (17% genotype 1a), 100% achieved SVR. A real‐world, pooled analysis of 12 cohorts that evaluated adults treated with 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir demonstrated an SVR of 99.1% (1599/1613) among participants with genotype 1, with or without compensated cirrhosis (Mangia, 2020). Ledipasvir/Sofosbuvir The fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) was approved by the FDA for the treatment of genotype 1 infection in treatment-naive patients based on two registration trials: ION-1 (865 treatment-naive patients; those with cirrhosis were included) and ION-3 (647 treatment-naive patients; those with cirrhosis were excluded). ION-1 investigated length of treatment (12 weeks vs 24 weeks) and the need for ribavirin (Afdhal, 2014a). SVR12 was 97% to 99% across all study arms with no difference in SVR12 based on length of treatment, use of ribavirin, or genotype 1 subtype. Sixteen percent of participants enrolled were classified as having cirrhosis. There was no difference in SVR12 rate in those with cirrhosis (97%) versus those without cirrhosis (98%). ION-3 excluded patients with cirrhosis and investigated shortening therapy from 12 weeks to 8 weeks (with or without ribavirin) (Kowdley, 2014). SVR12 rates were 93% to 95% across all study arms with no difference in SVR in the intention- to-treat analysis. However, relapse rates were higher in the 8-week arms (20/431)—regardless of ribavirin use—compared with the 12-week arm (3/216). Post hoc analyses of the ribavirin-free arms assessed baseline predictors HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 4 Treatment-Naive Genotype 1a Without Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) of relapse and identified lower relapse rates in patients who received 8 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir who had baseline HCV RNA levels <6 million IU/mL (2%; 2/123). The same held true for patients with similar baseline HCV RNA levels who received 12 weeks of treatment (2%; 2/131). This analysis was not controlled, which limits the generalizability of this approach to clinical practice. Published, real-world cohort data generally show comparable effectiveness of 8-week and 12-week courses of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir in treatment-naive patients without cirrhosis (Backus, 2016); (Ingiliz, 2016); (Ioannou, 2016); (Kowdley, 2016); (Terrault, 2016). However, only about half of patients eligible for 8 weeks of treatment received it, assignment of duration was not randomized, and baseline characteristics may have varied between 8- and 12-week groups. Real-world cohort studies of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir for treatment-naive, noncirrhotic black patients reported lower SVR12 rates with shorter duration therapy compared to white patients, although the absolute difference in SVR12 rates was <5% (Su, 2017); (Ioannou, 2016); (Wilder, 2016); (O'Brien, 2014). A subsequent real-world study among a Northern California Kaiser Permanente cohort of 436 black patients—most of whom were treated with an 8-week regimen—found similar SVR12 rates with 8 and 12 weeks of therapy (95.6% and 95.8%, respectively) (Marcus, 2018). Similarly, a Maryland Veterans Health Administration real-world cohort of black patients with predominantly genotype 1 infection found SVR12 rates of 93.7% (131/140) and 91.4% (332/363) with 8- and 12-week regimens, respectively (Tang, 2018). These data coupled with the availability of excellent rescue therapies for patients in whom initial DAA therapy fails support the use of 8 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir for black patients without cirrhosis and HCV RNA <6 million IU/mL. Based on available data, shortening treatment to less than 12 weeks is not recommended for HIV/HCV-coinfected patients (see HIV/HCV Coinfection section). For others with potential negative prognostic factors, shortening treatment duration should be done at the discretion of the practitioner. Alternative Regimen Elbasvir/Grazoprevir The fixed-dose combination of elbasvir (50 mg)/grazoprevir (100 mg) is recommended based on data from the phase 3 C- EDGE trial, which assessed the efficacy and safety of this regimen for 12 weeks in treatment-naive adults (genotypes 1, 4, and 6) (Zeuzem, 2015f). Patients were enrolled from 60 centers in 9 countries on 4 continents. Three hundred eighty-two patients (91% of the study cohort) were infected with genotype 1 (50% genotype 1a, 41% genotype 1b). The sustained virologic response rates at 12 weeks (SVR12) were 92% (144/157) in treatment-naive patients with genotype 1a infection and 99% (129/131) in genotype 1b patients. Findings from this phase 3 study support earlier phase 2 findings from the C- WORTHY trial in which SVR12 rates of 92% (48/52) and 95% (21/22) were demonstrated among genotype 1a and genotype 1b treatment-naive, noncirrhotic patients, respectively, who received 12 weeks of elbasvir/grazoprevir without ribavirin (Sulkowski, 2015b). The C-WORTHY trial enrolled both HCV-monoinfected and HIV/HCV-coinfected patients. The presence of certain baseline NS5A RASs significantly reduces SVR12 rates with a 12-week course of elbasvir/grazoprevir in genotype 1a-infected patients (Zeuzem, 2017). Baseline NS5A RASs were identified in 12% (19/154) of genotype 1a-infected patients enrolled in the C-EDGE study, of which 58% (11/19) achieved SVR12 compared to an SVR12 rate of 99% (133/135) in patients without these RASs receiving 12 weeks of elbasvir/grazoprevir (Zeuzem, 2017). Among treatment-naive patients, the presence of baseline NS5A RASs with >5-fold reduced sensitivity to elbasvir was associated with the most significant reduction in SVR12 with only 22% (2/9) of genotype 1a patients with these RASs achieving SVR12. In the phase 3 open-label C-EDGE TE trial of elbasvir/grazoprevir that enrolled treatment-experienced patients, 58 genotype 1a-infected patients received 16 weeks of therapy with elbasvir/grazoprevir plus ribavirin, and there were no virologic failures (Kwo, 2017). Subsequent integrated analysis of the elbasvir/grazoprevir phase 2 and 3 trials demonstrated an SVR12 rate of 100% (6/6) in genotype 1 patients with pretreatment NS5A RASs treated with elbasvir/grazoprevir plus ribavirin for 16 or 18 weeks (Jacobson, 2015b); (Thompson, 2015). Based on known inferior response in patients with baseline NS5A RASs, NS5A resistance testing is recommended in HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 4 Treatment-Naive Genotype 1a Without Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) genotype 1a patients who are being considered for elbasvir/grazoprevir therapy. If baseline RASs are present (ie, substitutions at amino acid positions 28, 30, 31, or 93), another recommended regimen should be used (additional information is available in the RAS section). Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 4 of 4 Treatment-Naive Genotype 1a With Compensated Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Treatment-Naive Genotype 1a With Compensated Cirrhosis Recommended and alternative regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for: Treatment-Naive Genotype 1a Patients With Compensated Cirrhosisa RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) 12 weeks I, A Daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg)b 8 weeks I, B Daily fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) 12 weeks I, A ALTERNATIVE DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of elbasvir (50 mg)/grazoprevir (100 mg) 12 weeks I, A a For decompensated cirrhosis, please refer to the appropriate section. b Dosing is 3 coformulated tablets (glecaprevir [100 mg]/pibrentasvir [40 mg]) taken once daily. Please refer to the prescribing information. For genotype 1a-infected, treatment-naive patients with compensated cirrhosis, there are 3 recommended regimens with comparable efficacy. Recommended Regimens Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir The daily fixed-dose combination sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) for 12 weeks was approved by the FDA for the treatment of genotype 1 infection in treatment-naive patients based on ASTRAL-1. This placebo-controlled trial involved a 12-week course of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir administered to 624 participants with genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 who were treatment naive (n=423) or previously treated with interferon-based therapy, with or without ribavirin or a protease inhibitor (n=201) (Feld, 2015). Of the 328 genotype 1 patients included, 323 achieved SVR12 with no difference in SVR12 observed by subtype (98% 1a, 99% 1b). Of 121 participants (all genotypes) classified as having cirrhosis, 120 achieved SVR12 (99%). The presence of baseline NS5A RASs (at 15% cutoff)—reported in 11% of genotype 1a and 18% of genotype 1b participant samples tested—did not influence SVR12 rate for genotype 1 (Hézode, 2018). Of the 2 virologic failures in ASTRAL-1 (<1% of treated participants), both were genotype 1 and had baseline RASs. There was no significant difference in the rates of adverse events in the sofosbuvir/velpatasvir vs placebo groups. The phase 3 POLARIS-2 study randomized 941 DAA-naive patients with genotype 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6—19% of whom had HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 3 Treatment-Naive Genotype 1a With Compensated Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) cirrhosis—to receive 8 weeks of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/voxilaprevir (100mg) or 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir (Jacobson, 2017). Of participants treated with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir, 170/172 (99%) with genotype 1a and 57/59 (97%) with genotype 1b achieved SVR with a single relapse observed with each subtype. A real-world, pooled analysis of 12 cohort studies demonstrated an SVR of 98.3% (349/355) among adults with genotype 1 and compensated cirrhosis who were treated with 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir (Mangia, 2020). Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir EXPEDITION-1 investigated the use of the daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg) administered as three 100 mg/40 mg fixed-dose combination pills in DAA-naive (75%) or -experienced (interferon or peginterferon ± ribavirin, or sofosbuvir plus ribavirin ± peginterferon) patients with compensated cirrhosis. Of 146 patients with genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 given 12 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir, 145 (99%) achieved SVR12. The single relapse occurred in a genotype 1a patient; SVR12 among these patients was 98% (47/48) (Forns, 2017). EXPEDITION-2, a study of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in 153 HIV/HCV-coinfected adults with genotype 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6, utilized 8 weeks of treatment for noncirrhotic patients and 12 weeks for cirrhotic patients (the recommended durations approved by the FDA). The overall SVR12 rate was 98% and there were no observed virologic failures among the 94 patients with genotype 1 infection (Rockstroh, 2018). In EXPEDITION-1 and EXPEDITION-2, neither subtype (1a vs 1b) nor the presence of baseline RASs impacted SVR12 results in DAA-naive genotype 1 patients. EXPEDITION-8 evaluated glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for a reduced duration of 8 weeks in 280 treatment-naive patients with compensated cirrhosis and genotype 1 (n=95, genotype 1a), 2, 4, 5 or 6 infection. Patients with a prior history of decompensation, hepatocellular carcinoma, and HIV or HBV coinfection were excluded from this study. SVR12 was 99% with no virologic failures (Brown, 2018). Ledipasvir/Sofosbuvir The fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) was approved by the FDA for the treatment of genotype 1 infection in treatment-naive patients based on two registration trials: ION-1 (865 treatment-naive patients; those with cirrhosis were included) and ION-3 (647 treatment-naive patients; those with cirrhosis were excluded). ION-1 investigated length of treatment (12 weeks vs 24 weeks) and the need for ribavirin (Afdhal, 2014a). SVR12 rates were 97% to 99% across all study arms with no difference in SVR12 based on length of treatment, use of ribavirin, or genotype 1 subtype. Sixteen percent of participants enrolled were classified as having cirrhosis. There was no difference in SVR12 rate in those with cirrhosis (97%) versus those without cirrhosis (98%). Alternative Regimen Elbasvir/Grazoprevir The recommendation for use of daily fixed-dose elbasvir (50 mg)/grazoprevir (100 mg) in cirrhotic patients with genotype 1 infection is based on 92 patients (22% of the study cohort) in the phase 3 C-EDGE trial who had Metavir F4 disease (Zeuzem, 2015f). SVR12 was 97% in this subgroup of cirrhotic patients. A similar 97% (28/29) SVR12 rate had previously been demonstrated in genotype 1 cirrhotic treatment-naive patients treated with 12 weeks of elbasvir/grazoprevir without ribavirin in the open-label phase 2 C-WORTHY trial, which enrolled both HCV-monoinfected and HIV/HCV-coinfected patients (Lawitz, 2015c). Presence or absence of cirrhosis does not appear to alter the efficacy of the elbasvir/grazoprevir regimen (Zeuzem, 2017); (Lawitz, 2015c). Presence of certain baseline NS5A RASs significantly reduces SVR12 rates with a 12-week course of the elbasvir/grazoprevir regimen in genotype 1a-infected patients (Zeuzem, 2017). Baseline NS5A RASs were identified in 12% (19/154) of genotype 1a-infected patients enrolled in the C-EDGE study, of which 58% (11/19) achieved SVR12 compared to 99% (133/135) in patients without these RASs (Zeuzem, 2017). Among treatment-naive patients, the presence of baseline NS5A RASs with a >5-fold reduced sensitivity to elbasvir was associated with the most significant reduction in SVR12 with only 22% (2/9) of genotype 1a patients with these RASs achieving SVR12. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 3 Treatment-Naive Genotype 1a With Compensated Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommendations for prolonging duration of treatment to 16 weeks with inclusion of ribavirin for treatment-naive genotype 1a patients with baseline NS5A RASs are based on extrapolation of data from the C-EDGE TE trial. In this phase 3 open- label trial of elbasvir/grazoprevir that enrolled treatment-experienced patients, among 58 genotype 1a patients who received 16 weeks of therapy with elbasvir/grazoprevir plus ribavirin, there were no virologic failures (Kwo, 2017). Subsequent integrated analysis of elbasvir/grazoprevir phase 2 and 3 trials demonstrated an SVR12 rate of 100% (6/6) in genotype 1 patients with pretreatment NS5A RASs treated with elbasvir/grazoprevir for 16 or 18 weeks plus ribavirin (Jacobson, 2015b); (Thompson, 2015). Based on known inferior response in patients with baseline NS5A RASs, NS5A resistance testing is recommended in genotype 1a patients who are being considered for elbasvir/grazoprevir therapy. If baseline RASs are present (ie, substitutions at amino acid position 28, 30, 31, or 93), another recommended regimen should be selected. Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 3 Treatment-Naive Genotype 1b Without Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Treatment-Naive Genotype 1b Without Cirrhosis Recommended and alternative regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for: Treatment-Naive Patients Genotype 1b Without Cirrhosis RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg)a 8 weeks I, A Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) 12 weeks I, A Daily fixed-dose combination of elbasvir (50 mg)/grazoprevir (100 mg) 12 weeksb I, A Daily fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) 12 weeks I, A Daily fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) for patients who are HIV-uninfected and whose HCV RNA level is <6 million IU/mL 8 weeksc I, B a Dosing is 3 coformulated tablets (glecaprevir [100 mg]/pibrentasvir [40 mg]) taken once daily. Please refer to the prescribing information. b For HIV/HCV coinfected patients, a treatment duration of 12 weeks is recommended. c An 8-week regimen can be considered in those with genotype 1b infection and mild fibrosis (see text for details). Recommended Regimens Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir Based on favorable data for 8 weeks of treatment for noncirrhotic patients in the phase 2 SURVEYOR-1 study (33/34 patients with SVR and no virologic failures) (Kwo, 2017b), ENDURANCE-1 enrolled 703 noncirrhotic, genotype 1 patients who were DAA-naive or in whom a previous interferon-based regimen failed. Participants were randomized to receive 8 weeks or 12 weeks of the daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg) administered as three 100 mg/40 mg fixed-dose combination pills (Zeuzem, 2018). Of those enrolled, 43% had genotype 1a, 85% had fibrosis stage 0 or 1, and 62% were treatment naive. Overall SVR12 rates for the intention-to-treat population were 99% (348/351) in the 8-week arm and 99.7% (351/352) in the 12-week arm. The 8-week arm met the predefined study criteria for noninferiority to the 12-week arm. A single patient experienced on-treatment virologic failure in this study (genotype 1a, day 29). Notably, there were no documented relapses in either arm. EXPEDITION-1 investigated the use of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in DAA-naive (75%) or -experienced (interferon or peginterferon ± ribavirin, or sofosbuvir plus ribavirin ± peginterferon) patients with compensated cirrhosis. Of 146 patients with genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 given 12 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir, 145 (99%) achieved SVR12. All genotype 1b patients achieved SVR (Forns, 2017). EXPEDITION-2, a study of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in 153 HIV/HCV-coinfected persons with genotype 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6, HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 3 Treatment-Naive Genotype 1b Without Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) utilized 8 weeks of treatment for noncirrhotic patients and 12 weeks for cirrhotic patients (the recommended durations approved by the FDA). The overall SVR12 rate was 98% and there were no observed virologic failures among the 94 patients with genotype 1 infection (Rockstroh, 2017). In EXPEDITION-1 and EXPEDITION-2, neither subtype (1a vs 1b) nor the presence of baseline RASs impacted SVR12 results in DAA-naive genotype 1 patients. CERTAIN-1 evaluated 8 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir among 129 Japanese DAA-naive noncirrhotic patients (97% genotype 1b); SVR12 was of 99% (128/129) (Chayama, 2018). Real-world cohorts from Germany (34% genotype 1a) and Italy (67% genotype 1a) demonstrate similarly high efficacy among treatment-naive, noncirrhotic genotype 1 patients treated with 8 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir using a modified intention-to-treat analysis (excluding those not completing treatment or lost to follow-up). SVR rates were 100% in both the German (228/228) (Berg, 2019) and the Italian (307/307) (D’Ambrosio, 2019) cohorts. Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir The fixed-dose combination of 12 weeks of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) was approved by the FDA for the treatment of genotype 1 infection in treatment-naive patients based on ASTRAL-1. This placebo-controlled trial involved a 12-week course of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir administered to 624 participants with genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 infection who were treatment naive (n=423) or previously treated with interferon-based therapy, with or without ribavirin or a protease inhibitor (n=201); (Feld, 2015). Of the 328 genotype 1 patients included, 323 achieved SVR12 with no difference observed by subtype (98% 1a, 99% 1b). Of 121 participants (all genotypes) classified as having cirrhosis, 120 achieved SVR12 (99%). The presence of baseline NS5A RASs (at 15% cutoff)—reported in 11% of genotype 1a and 18% of genotype 1b participant samples tested—did not influence SVR rate for genotype 1 (Hézode, 2018). Of the 2 virologic failures in ASTRAL-1 (<1% of treated participants), both were genotype 1 and had baseline RASs. There was no significant difference in the rates of adverse events in the sofosbuvir/velpatasvir vs placebo groups. The phase 3 POLARIS-2 study randomized 941 DAA-naive patients with genotype 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6—with or without compensated cirrhosis—to receive either 8 weeks of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/voxilaprevir (100mg) or 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir (Jacobson, 2017). Of participants treated with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir, 170/172 (99%) with genotype 1a and 57/59 (97%) with genotype 1b achieved SVR with a single relapse observed in each subtype. Elbasvir/Grazoprevir The fixed-dose combination of elbasvir (50 mg)/grazoprevir (100 mg) is recommended based on data from the phase 3 C- EDGE trial, which assessed the efficacy and safety of this regimen for 12 weeks in treatment-naive adults (genotype 1, 4, or 6) (Zeuzem, 2015f). Patients were enrolled from 60 centers in 9 countries on 4 continents. Three hundred eighty-two patients (91% of the study cohort) were infected with genotype 1 (50% genotype 1a, 41% genotype 1b). The SVR12 was 92% (144/157) in treatment-naive patients with genotype 1a and 99% (129/131) in those with genotype 1b. Findings from this phase 3 study support earlier phase 2 findings from the C-WORTHY trial in which SVR12 rates of 92% (48/52) and 95% (21/22) were demonstrated among genotype 1a and genotype 1b treatment-naive noncirrhotic patients, respectively, who received 12 weeks of elbasvir/grazoprevir without ribavirin (Sulkowski, 2015b). The C-WORTHY trial enrolled both HCV-monoinfected and HIV/HCV-coinfected patients. A phase 3, global STREAGER trial of 89 treatment-naive patients with genotype 1b infection and low fibrosis stage (defined as a transient elastography score <9.5 or a Fibrotest® score <0.59 [F0 to F2]) evaluated the efficacy of 8 weeks of elbasvir/grazoprevir and found an SVR rate of 98% (87/89), supporting the option of using a shorter treatment duration for genotype 1b patients with low scores using these fibrosis staging modalities (Abergel, 2018). In contrast to genotype 1a, the presence of baseline substitutions associated with NS5A resistance did not appear to affect genotype 1b response to elbasvir/grazoprevir. Thus, current data do not support extending the treatment duration or adding ribavirin in genotype 1b patients with NS5A RASs. Ledipasvir/Sofosbuvir HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 3 Treatment-Naive Genotype 1b Without Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) The fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) was approved by the FDA for the treatment of genotype 1 infection in treatment-naive patients based on a pair of registration trials: ION-1 (865 treatment-naive patients; those with cirrhosis were included) and ION-3 (647 treatment-naive patients; those with cirrhosis were excluded). ION-1 investigated length of treatment (12 weeks vs 24 weeks) and the need for ribavirin (Afdhal, 2014a). SVR12 rates were 97% to 99% across all study arms with no difference in SVR based on length of treatment, use of ribavirin, or genotype 1 subtype. Sixteen percent of participants enrolled were classified as having cirrhosis. There was no difference in SVR12 rate in those with cirrhosis (97%) versus those without cirrhosis (98%). ION-3 excluded patients with cirrhosis and investigated shortening ledipasvir/sofosbuvir therapy from 12 weeks to 8 weeks (with or without ribavirin) (Kowdley, 2014). SVR12 rates were 93% to 95% across all study arms, with no difference in SVR in the intention-to-treat analysis. However, relapse rates were higher in the 8-week arms (20/431)—regardless of ribavirin use—compared with the 12-week arm (3/216). Post hoc analyses of the ribavirin-free arms assessed baseline predictors of relapse and identified lower relapse rates in patients receiving 8 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir who had baseline HCV RNA levels <6 million IU/mL (2%; 2/123). The same held true for patients with similar baseline HCV RNA levels who received 12 weeks of treatment (2%; 2/131). This analysis was not controlled, which limits the generalizability of this approach to clinical practice. Real-world cohort studies of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir for treatment-naive, noncirrhotic black patients reported lower SVR12 rates with shorter duration therapy compared to white patients, although the absolute difference in SVR12 rates was <5% (Su, 2017); (Ioannou, 2016); (Wilder, 2016); (O'Brien, 2014). A subsequent real-world study among a Northern California Kaiser Permanente cohort of 436 black patients—most of whom were treated with an 8-week regimen—found comparable SVR12 rates with 8 and 12 weeks of therapy (95.6% and 95.8%, respectively) (Marcus, 2018). Similarly, a Maryland Veterans Health Administration real-world cohort of black patients with predominantly genotype 1 infection found SVR12 rates of 93.7% (131/140) and 91.4% (332/363) with 8- and 12-week regimens, respectively (Tang, 2018). These data coupled with the availability of excellent rescue therapies for patients in whom initial DAA therapy fails support the use of 8 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir for black patients without cirrhosis and HCV RNA <6 million IU/mL. Based on available data, shortening treatment to less than 12 weeks is not recommended for HIV/HCV-coinfected patients (see HIV/HCV Coinfection section). Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 3 Treatment-Naive Genotype 1b With Compensated Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Treatment-Naive Genotype 1b With Compensated Cirrhosis Recommended and alternative regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for: Treatment-Naive Genotype 1b Patients With Compensated Cirrhosisa RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) 12 weeks I, A Daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg)b 8 weeks I, B Daily fixed-dose combination of elbasvir (50 mg)/grazoprevir (100 mg) 12 weeks I, A Daily fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) 12 weeks I, A a For decompensated cirrhosis, please refer to the appropriate section. b Dosing is 3 coformulated tablets (glecaprevir [100 mg]/pibrentasvir [40 mg]) taken once daily. Please refer to the prescribing information. For genotype 1b-infected, treatment-naive patients with compensated cirrhosis, there are 4 recommended regimens with comparable efficacy. The alternative regimen is classified as such because, compared to the recommended regimens, it requires a longer duration of treatment, involves greater prescribing complexity, is potentially less efficacious, and/or there are limited supporting data. Recommended Regimens Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir The daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) for 12 weeks was approved by the FDA for the treatment of genotype 1 infection in treatment-naive patients based on ASTRAL-1. This placebo-controlled trial involved a 12-week course of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir administered to 624 participants with genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 who were treatment-naive (n=423) or previously treated with interferon-based therapy, with or without ribavirin or a protease inhibitor (n=201) (Feld, 2015). Of the 328 genotype 1 patients included, 323 achieved SVR12 with no difference in SVR12 observed by subtype (98% 1a, 99% 1b). Among 121 participants (all genotypes) classified as having cirrhosis, 120 achieved SVR12 (99%). Baseline NS5A RASs (at 15% cutoff)—reported in 11% of genotype 1a and 18% of genotype 1b participant samples tested—did not influence SVR12 rate for genotype 1 (Hézode, 2018). Of the 2 virologic failures in ASTRAL-1 (<1% of treated participants), both were genotype 1 and had baseline RASs. There was no significant difference in the rates of adverse events in the sofosbuvir/velpatasvir vs placebo groups. The phase 3 POLARIS-2 study randomized 941 DAA-naive patients with genotype 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 infection—19% of whom had compensated cirrhosis—to receive either 8 weeks of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/voxilaprevir (100 mg) or 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir (Jacobson, 2017). Of participants treated with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir, 99% (170/172) with genotype 1a and 97% (57/59) with genotype 1b achieved SVR with a single relapse observed with each HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 2 Treatment-Naive Genotype 1b With Compensated Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) subtype. Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir EXPEDITION-1 investigated use of the daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg) administered as three 100 mg/40 mg fixed-dose combination pills in DAA-naive (75%) or -experienced (interferon or peginterferon ± ribavirin, or sofosbuvir plus ribavirin ± peginterferon) patients with compensated cirrhosis. Of 146 patients with genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 given 12 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir, 145 (99%) achieved SVR12; all genotype 1b patients achieved SVR (Forns, 2017). EXPEDITION-2, a study of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in 153 HIV/HCV-coinfected adults with genotype 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6, utilized 8 weeks of treatment for noncirrhotic patients and 12 weeks for cirrhotic patients (the recommended durations approved by the FDA). The overall SVR12 rate was 98% and there were no observed virologic failures among the 94 patients with genotype 1 infection (Rockstroh, 2017). In EXPEDITION-1 and EXPEDITION-2, neither subtype (1a vs 1b) nor the presence of baseline RASs impacted SVR12 results in DAA-naive genotype 1 patients. EXPEDITION-8 evaluated glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for a reduced duration of 8 weeks in 280 treatment-naive patients with compensated cirrhosis and genotype 1 (n=136, genotype 1b), 2, 4, 5 or 6 infection. Patients with a prior history of decompensation, hepatocellular carcinoma, and HIV or HBV coinfection were excluded from this study. SVR12 was 99% with no virologic failures (Brown, 2018). A meta-analysis of real-world cohorts that examined glecaprevir/pibrentasvir treatment response among adults demonstrated SVR12 rates of 99.6% (n=848) and 98.2% (n=60) among participants with genotype 1 infection without or with compensated cirrhosis, respectively, with 8 weeks of treatment (Lampertico, 2020). Elbasvir/Grazoprevir The recommendation for use of daily fixed-dose elbasvir (50 mg)/grazoprevir (100 mg) in cirrhotic patients with genotype 1 infection is based on 92 patients (22% of the study cohort) in the phase 3 C-EDGE trial who had Metavir F4 disease (Zeuzem, 2015f). SVR12 was 97% in the subgroup of cirrhotic patients. A similar 97% (28/29) SVR12 rate had previously been demonstrated in genotype 1 cirrhotic treatment-naive patients treated with 12 weeks of elbasvir/grazoprevir without ribavirin in the open-label phase 2 C-WORTHY trial, which enrolled both HCV-monoinfected and HIV/HCV-coinfected patients (Lawitz, 2015c). Presence or absence of cirrhosis does not appear to alter the efficacy of the elbasvir/grazoprevir regimen (Zeuzem, 2017); (Lawitz, 2015c). Ledipasvir/Sofosbuvir The daily fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) was approved by the FDA for the treatment of genotype 1 infection in treatment-naive patients based on 2 registration trials: ION-1 (865 treatment-naive patients; those with cirrhosis were included) and ION-3 (647 treatment-naive patients; those with cirrhosis were excluded). ION-1 investigated length of treatment (12 weeks vs 24 weeks) and the need for ribavirin (Afdhal, 2014a). SVR12 rates were 97% to 99% across all study arms with no difference in SVR based on length of treatment, use of ribavirin, or genotype 1 subtype. Sixteen percent of participants enrolled were classified as cirrhotic. There was no difference in SVR12 rate in cirrhotic (97%) versus noncirrhotic patients (98%). Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 2 Treatment-Naive Genotype 2 Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Treatment-Naive Genotype 2 The following pages include guidance for management of treatment-naive patients with genotype 2 infection. Treatment-Naive Genotype 2 Without Cirrhosis Treatment-Naive Genotype 2 With Compensated Cirrhosis Simplified HCV Treatment for Treatment-Naive Adults Without Cirrhosis Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 1 Treatment-Naive Genotype 2 Without Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Treatment-Naive Genotype 2 Without Cirrhosis Recommended and alternative regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for: Treatment-Naive Genotype 2 Patients Without Cirrhosis RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg)a 8 weeks I, A Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) 12 weeks I, A a Dosing is 3 coformulated tablets (glecaprevir [100 mg]/pibrentasvir [40 mg]) taken once daily. Please refer to the prescribing information. Recommended Regimens Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir ENDURANCE-2 was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of the daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg) administered as three 100 mg/40 mg fixed-dose combination pills for 12 weeks among 302 genotype 2-infected treatment-naive or -experienced participants. Treatment-experienced patients included those previously treated with interferon or peginterferon ± ribavirin, or sofosbuvir plus ribavirin ± peginterferon. Patients randomized to placebo later received open-label treatment with glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for 12 weeks. Among 202 patients randomized to active treatment, 70% (141/202) were treatment naive and none had cirrhosis. The SVR12 rates were 99% and 100% by intention-to-treat and modified intention-to-treat analysis, respectively. There were no virologic failures. One participant who achieved SVR4 was lost to follow-up before the SVR12 evaluation. There was no effect of baseline RASs on SVR12 rate. Overall, therapy was well tolerated and the adverse event profile was not different compared to placebo (Asselah, 2018b). A shorter duration of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for 8 weeks was evaluated in the SURVEYOR-II, part 4 study. This was a single-arm, phase 2 study that evaluated glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for 8 weeks among 203 treatment-naive or -experienced patients (previously treated with interferon or peginterferon ± ribavirin, or sofosbuvir plus ribavirin ± peginterferon) with genotype 2, 4, 5, or 6 infection without cirrhosis. Of the 142 genotype 2-infected patients, 137 (96%) were treatment naive. Among the treatment-naive, genotype 2-infected participants, 135/137 (99%) achieved SVR12. The presence of baseline RASs had minimal effect on SVR12 rates. Fifty-three of 126 (42%) treatment-naive and -experienced participants with genotype 2 had the L31M RAS within the NS5A gene at baseline. Fifty-one of 53 (96%) of these participants achieved SVR12 (Asselah, 2018b). While not a head-to-head comparison, the results of ENDURANCE-2 and SURVEYOR-II, part 4 indicate that glecaprevir/pibrentasvir administered for 8 or 12 weeks is highly efficacious among genotype 2-infected, treatment-naive patients without cirrhosis. In an integrated analysis of 297 DAA-naive, noncirrhotic patients with genotype 2 infection treated with 8 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in 6 phase 2 or 3 clinical trials, SVR12 was 98% (252/257) (Naganuma, 2019). Additionally, a real-world cohort of treatment-naive, noncirrhotic genotype 2 patients from Italy treated with HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 2 Treatment-Naive Genotype 2 Without Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for 8 weeks achieved an SVR rate of 98% (173/175) (D’Ambrosio, 2019). A meta-analysis of real- world cohorts that examined glecaprevir/pibrentasvir treatment response among adults demonstrated SVR12 rates of 99.0% (n=274) and 98.0% (n=29) among participants with genotype 2 infection without or with compensated cirrhosis, respectively, with 8 weeks of treatment (Lampertico, 2020). Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir The daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) for 12 weeks was approved by the FDA for the treatment of genotype 2 infection in patients without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis. ASTRAL-2 compared 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir to 12 weeks of sofosbuvir plus ribavirin in 266 treatment-naive and -experienced patients without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis. The study showed superior efficacy of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir (SVR12 99% vs 94%); (Foster, 2015a). ASTRAL-1 also included 104 genotype 2 treatment-naive and -experienced participants without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis, all of whom achieved SVR12 (Feld, 2015). Pooled analysis of all genotype 2 patients in ASTRAL-1 and ASTRAL-2 demonstrated 100% SVR12 in participants with compensated cirrhosis (29/29) and 99% SVR12 in treatment-naive participants (194/195). Among patients with genotype 2 receiving sofosbuvir/velpatasvir, the presence of baseline NS5A or NS5B RASs was not associated with virologic failure (Asselah, 2018). The POLARIS-2 phase 3 study randomized DAA-naive patients to 8 weeks of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/voxilaprevir (100 mg) versus 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir. Fifty-three patients with genotype 2 were included in the sofosbuvir/velpatasvir arm and all achieved SVR12 (100%). This study confirms the high efficacy and safety of this 12-week regimen in patients with genotype 2 infection (Jacobson, 2017). In a single-arm, phase 3 study from Asia that included 375 treatment-naive and -experienced patients with genotype 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 infection (18% with cirrhosis) treated with 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir, SVR was achieved in 95% (362/375) (Wei, 2019). Of the 62 patients with genotype 2 infection, 100% achieved SVR. A real-world, pooled analysis of 12 cohort studies demonstrated an SVR of 99.3% (1535/1546) among adults with genotype 2 infection (with or without compensated cirrhosis) who were treated with 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir (Mangia, 2020). Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 2 Treatment-Naive Genotype 2 With Compensated Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Treatment-Naive Genotype 2 With Compensated Cirrhosis Recommended and alternative regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for: Treatment-Naive Genotype 2 Patients With Compensated Cirrhosisa RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) 12 weeks I, A Daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg)b 8 weeks I, B a For decompensated cirrhosis, please refer to the appropriate section. b Dosing is 3 coformulated tablets (glecaprevir [100 mg]/pibrentasvir [40 mg]) taken once daily. Please refer to the prescribing information. Recommended Regimens Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir The daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) for 12 weeks was approved by the FDA for the treatment of genotype 2 infection in patients without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis. ASTRAL-2 compared 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir to 12 weeks of sofosbuvir plus ribavirin in 266 treatment-naive and -experienced patients without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis. The study showed superior efficacy of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir compared to sofosbuvir plus ribavirin (SVR12 99% vs 94%); (Foster, 2015a). ASTRAL-1 also included 104 genotype 2 treatment-naive and -experienced patients without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis, all of whom achieved SVR12 (Feld, 2015). Pooled analysis of all genotype 2 patients in ASTRAL-1 and ASTRAL-2 demonstrated 100% SVR12 in those with compensated cirrhosis (29/29) and 99% SVR12 in treatment-naive participants (194/195). Among patients with genotype 2 receiving sofosbuvir/velpatasvir, the presence of baseline NS5A or NS5B RASs was not associated with virologic failure (Asselah, 2018). The POLARIS-2 phase 3 study randomized DAA-naive patients to 8 weeks of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/voxilaprevir (100mg) versus 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir. Fifty-three patients with genotype 2 were included in the sofosbuvir/velpatasvir arm and all achieved SVR12 (100%). This study confirms the high efficacy and safety of this 12-week regimen in patients with genotype 2 infection (Jacobson, 2017). A real-world, pooled analysis of 12 cohort studies demonstrated an SVR of 98.5% (266/270) among adults with genotype 2 infection and compensated cirrhosis who were treated with 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir (Mangia, 2020). Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir EXPEDITION-1 was a multicenter, open-label, single-arm, phase 3 trial that enrolled 146 treatment-naive or -experienced patients (interferon or peginterferon ± ribavirin, or sofosbuvir plus ribavirin ± peginterferon) with genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 2 Treatment-Naive Genotype 2 With Compensated Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) infection and compensated cirrhosis. Participants were treated with the daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg) administered as three 100 mg/40 mg fixed-dose combination pills for 12 weeks. Across all genotypes, 145/146 (99%) achieved SVR12 (Forns, 2017). EXPEDITION-1 included 31 treatment-naive and -experienced persons with genotype 2 infection and compensated cirrhosis; all achieved SVR12. Baseline NS5A RASs were detected (by next-generation sequencing using a 15% detection cutoff) in 40% of 133 tested participants. Baseline NS5A RASs had no effect on SVR rates among treatment-naive and -experienced patients with genotype 2 infection. EXPEDITION-8 evaluated glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for a reduced duration of 8 weeks in 280 treatment-naive patients with compensated cirrhosis and genotype 1, 2 (n=26), 4, 5 or 6 infection. Patients with a prior history of decompensation, hepatocellular carcinoma, and HIV or HBV coinfection were excluded from this study. SVR12 was 99% with no virologic failures (Brown, 2018). Real-world data support the use of 8 weeks in cirrhotic patients (Flamm, 2020). Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 2 Treatment-Naive Genotype 3 Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Treatment-Naive Genotype 3 The following pages include guidance for management of treatment-naive patients with genotype 3 infection. Treatment-Naive Genotype 3 Without Cirrhosis Treatment-Naive Genotype 3 With Compensated Cirrhosis Simplified HCV Treatment for Treatment-Naive Adults Without Cirrhosis Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 1 Treatment-Naive Genotype 3 Without Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Treatment-Naive Genotype 3 Without Cirrhosis Recommended and alternative regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for: Treatment-Naive Genotype 3 Patients Without Cirrhosis RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg)a 8 weeks I, A Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) 12 weeks I, A a Dosing is 3 coformulated tablets (glecaprevir [100 mg]/pibrentasvir [40 mg]) taken once daily. Please refer to the prescribing information. Recommended Regimens Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir ENDURANCE-3 was a randomized (2:1) trial comparing 12 weeks of the daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg), administered as three 100 mg/40 mg fixed-dose combination pills, to 12 weeks of sofosbuvir (400 mg) and daclatasvir (60 mg) among 348 treatment-naive participants with genotype 3 infection without cirrhosis. The trial was later amended to include an open-label arm that evaluated glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for an 8-week duration among 157 treatment-naive participants with genotype 3 infection without cirrhosis. Participants receiving glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for 8 or 12 weeks achieved an SVR12 rate of 95% in an intention-to-treat analysis (222/233 participants receiving the 12-week regimen; 149/157 participants receiving the 8-week regimen) (Foster, 2017). Virologic failure was observed in 6 participants receiving the 8-week regimen (1 virologic breakthrough; 5 relapses) and in 4 participants in the 12-week arm (1 virologic breakthrough; 3 relapses). Both the 8- and 12-week glecaprevir/pibrentasvir regimens met noninferiority criteria for SVR12 compared to the standard of care arm of sofosbuvir/daclatasvir, which reported an SVR12 rate of 97%. While the baseline presence of the Y93H substitution did not affect SVR rates (10/10 with Y93H achieved SVR with an 8 week duration vs 165/171 without Y93H), the presence of the A30K substitution was associated with a lower SVR rate (14/18 with A30K achieved SVR with an 8 week duration vs 161/163 without A30K) (Krishnan, 2018). Of the 14 treatment- naive patients with genotype 3 without cirrhosis with baseline A30K who received a 12-week duration of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir, 13/14 achieved SVR. Given the small numbers, there is insufficient evidence at this time to recommend testing for RASs or extension of therapy in the setting of an A30K substitution. In addition, data from real-world cohorts support the effectiveness of an 8-week regimen of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir therapy for treatment-naive, noncirrhotic patients with genotype 3 infection (Drysdale, 2019); (Sterling, 2019). Among treatment-naive patients with genotype 3, 99% (162/164) of patients in a German cohort (Berg, 2019) and 96% (46/48) of patients in an Italian cohort (D’Ambrosio, 2019) treated with 8 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir achieved SVR12. A meta- analysis of real-world cohorts that examined glecaprevir/pibrentasvir treatment response among adults demonstrated an SVR12 of 99.2% (n=320) among noncirrhotic participants with genotype 3 infection with 8 weeks of treatment (Lampertico, 2020). HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 2 Treatment-Naive Genotype 3 Without Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir The daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) for 12 weeks was approved by the FDA for the treatment of genotype 3 infection in patients without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis. ASTRAL-3 demonstrated superiority of 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir to 24 weeks sofosbuvir plus ribavirin in 552 treatment-naive and -experienced patients without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis (Foster, 2015a). Among treatment-naive, noncirrhotic patients, SVR12 rates were 98% (160/163) for sofosbuvir/velpatasvir compared to 90% (141/156) for sofosbuvir plus ribavirin. The phase 3 POLARIS-2 study evaluated 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir in genotype 3-infected, noncirrhotic patients who were either treatment-naive or interferon-experienced. Eighty-nine genotype 3 patients received the sofosbuvir/velpatasvir regimen and 97% achieved SVR12 (86/89) (Jacobson, 2017). There were no virologic failures. A subsequent open-label study conducted in Russia and Sweden demonstrated similar response rates in noncirrhotic genotype 3 patients (Isakov, 2019). Additionally, an observational cohort study from Germany supports the effectiveness of 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir among treatment-naive patients with genotype 3 infection (von Felden, 2018). Of 167 treatment-naive genotype 3 patients (25% cirrhosis in overall cohort), 162 were cured and there were no virologic failures. Other real-world data from cohorts across North America, Canada, and the United Kingdom also demonstrate high SVR rates with 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir among genotype 3, treatment-naive, noncirrhotic patients (Drysdale, 2019); (Mangia, 2019). Another recent study provided information about the use of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir in patients with genotype 3b, a subtype rarely encountered in the United States. The single-arm, open-label, phase 3 trial of patients enrolled from Asia treated with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir reported an overall SVR of 86% among 84 patients with genotype 3 infection, with or without cirrhosis (Wei, 2019). Among patients with genotype 3a, 95% (40/42) achieved SVR12. In the subgroup of noncirrhotic patients with genotype 3b, 89% (25/28) achieved SVR12 with 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir. All patients with genotype 3b enrolled in this trial had NS5A RASs at A30K or L31M, or both.  Another study among 90 noncirrhotic treatment-naive patients—most receiving opioid agonist therapy—treated with only 8 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir demonstrated an SVR rate of 96% (86/90) (Boyle, 2020). A real‐world, pooled analysis of 12 cohorts that evaluated adults treated with 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir demonstrated an SVR of 98.3% (1649/1677) among participants with genotype 3, with or without compensated cirrhosis (Mangia, 2020). Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 2 Treatment-Naive Genotype 3 With Compensated Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Treatment-Naive Genotype 3 With Compensated Cirrhosis Recommended and alternative regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for: Treatment-Naive Genotype 3 Patients With Compensated Cirrhosisa RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) for patients without baseline NS5A RAS Y93H 12 weeks I, A Daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg)b 8 weeks I, B ALTERNATIVE DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) with weight-based ribavirin for patients with baseline NS5A RAS Y93H 12 weeks IIa, A Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/voxilaprevir (100 mg) for patients with baseline NS5A RAS Y93H 12 weeks IIa, B a For decompensated cirrhosis, please refer to the appropriate section. b Dosing is 3 coformulated tablets (glecaprevir [100 mg]/pibrentasvir [40 mg]) taken once daily. Please refer to the prescribing information. Recommended Regimens Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir The daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) for 12 weeks was approved by the FDA for the treatment of genotype 3 infection in patients without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis. ASTRAL-3 randomized 552 treatment-naive and -experienced patients (without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis) to 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir or 24 weeks sofosbuvir plus ribavirin (Foster, 2015a). Among those with compensated cirrhosis, the SVR12 was 93% (40/43) in the sofosbuvir/velpatasvir arm compared to 73% (33/45) among those in the sofosbuvir plus ribavirin arm. Of the 250 participants who received sofosbuvir/velpatasvir, 16% (n=43) had baseline NS5A RASs, of which 88% achieved SVR12 compared to 97% without baseline substitutions. Eighty-four percent (21/25) of those with Y93H achieved SVR12 compared to 97% (242/249) in those without this RAS (Foster, 2015a). Ribavirin use was not evaluated in this study. POLARIS-3 was a randomized, phase 3 trial that compared 8 weeks of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/voxilaprevir (100 mg) to 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir among 219 DAA-naive participants with genotype 3 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 3 Treatment-Naive Genotype 3 With Compensated Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) infection and cirrhosis (Jacobson, 2017). The SVR12 rate was 96% in both arms; 105/109 of those randomized to 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir achieved SVR. Four participants in the sofosbuvir/velpatasvir arm had the Y93H substitution; all achieved SVR12. A real-world, pooled analysis of 12 cohort studies demonstrated an SVR of 96.9% (314/324) among adults with genotype 3 infection and compensated cirrhosis who were treated with 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir (Mangia, 2020). To explore whether ribavirin is required for patients with genotype 3 infection and cirrhosis, a randomized, open-label study of 204 genotype 3 patients with compensated cirrhosis (including participants with NS3/4 protease inhibitor and NS5B inhibitor treatment experience) was conducted at 29 sites in Spain. SVR12 was achieved in 91% without ribavirin (5% relapse rate) and 96% with ribavirin (2% relapse rate). Baseline NS5A RASs affected response rates. Among patients with Y93H RAS, 50% (2/4) treated with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir without ribavirin achieved SVR12 compared to 89% (8/9) among those receiving ribavirin as part of their treatment regimen (Esteban, 2018). In 293 patients with genotype 3 infection (25% with cirrhosis and 4% with DAA experience) enrolled in a multicenter cohort study from Germany in which patients received 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir with or without ribavirin, there was only 1 virologic failure in a patient with DAA treatment experience (von Felden, 2018). All 5 genotype 3 cirrhotic patients with RASs were prescribed ribavirin along with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir and achieved SVR. Pending further data on optimal therapy in the setting of a baseline Y93H substitution, patients with compensated cirrhosis should have ribavirin added to the regimen of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir or another regimen should be considered. Another recent study provided information about use of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir therapy in patients with genotype 3b infection, a subtype rarely encountered in the United States. The single-arm, open-label, phase 3 trial enrolled patients from Asia (predominantly China) and treated them with 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir. Ninety percent (60/67) of patients with cirrhosis achieved SVR12 (Wei, 2019). In the subset of 14 patients with genotype 3b infection and cirrhosis, however, only 50% (7/14) achieved SVR12. All patients with genotype 3b enrolled in this trial had NS5A RASs at either A30K or L31M, or both. The influence of subtype and RASs on SVR rates warrants consideration in the use of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir among cirrhotic patients with genotype 3 infection, although genotype 3b is rare in non-Asian populations. If NS5A resistance testing is unavailable, glecaprevir/pibrentasvir should be used. If drug drug interactions or other considerations preclude the use of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir then a referral to a specialist in HCV treatment should be considered. Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir SURVEYOR-II—a partially randomized, open-label, multicenter, 4-part, phase 2 trial—compared 12 weeks of the daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg), administered as three 100 mg/40 mg fixed-dose combination pills, to glecaprevir/pibrentasvir plus ribavirin among 48 treatment-naive, genotype 3-infected participants with compensated cirrhosis. All patients treated with 12 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir, with or without ribavirin, achieved SVR12 (Kwo, 2016b). A recent real-world cohort of 723 Italian treatment-naive and -experienced patients with or without cirrhosis were treated with glecaprevir/pibrentasvir according to the manufacturer’s prescribing information. One hundred percent (21/21) of patients with genotype 3 infection who received 12 or 16 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir (likely indicative of more advanced liver disease or treatment experience) achieved SVR12, compared to 95.8% (46/48) who received an 8-week regimen (D’Ambrosio 2019). Comparably high SVR12 rates were reported with 12 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir among cirrhotic persons with genotype 3 infection in other real-world cohorts (Drysdale, 2019); (Sterling, 2019). EXPEDITION-8 included an evaluation of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for a reduced duration of 8 weeks in treatment-naive patients with compensated cirrhosis including genotype 3 (n=63). Patients with a prior history of decompensation, hepatocellular carcinoma, and HIV or HBV coinfection were excluded from this study. Among the participants with genotype 3, 95% (60/63) achieved SVR12 with a single participant experiencing virologic failure (relapse) and 2 participants lost to follow-up (Brown, 2019). HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 3 Treatment-Naive Genotype 3 With Compensated Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Alternative Regimen Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir/Voxilaprevir POLARIS-3 was a randomized, phase 3 trial that compared 8 weeks of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/voxilaprevir (100 mg) to 12 weeks of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) among 219 DAA-naive participants with genotype 3 infection and cirrhosis (Jacobson, 2017). Thirty-one percent of participants were interferon treatment experienced. The SVR12 rate was 96% in both arms, 106/110 of patients randomized to 8 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir and 105/109 of those randomized to 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir. There were 2 virologic failures in each arm (2 relapses in the sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir arm; 1 virologic breakthrough and 1 relapse in the sofosbuvir/velpatasvir arm). Baseline RASs had no effect on treatment response. Among the 6 participants with Y93H in the sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir arm and 4 in the sofosbuvir/velpatasvir arm, all achieved SVR12. Additionally, no patients receiving sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir with virologic failure developed RASs. Although an 8-week regimen was studied in POLARIS-3, a 12-week regimen of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir was approved by the FDA for the indication of retreatment of DAA-experienced patients and could be considered as an alternative regimen for patients with cirrhosis and Y93H. Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 3 Treatment-Naive Genotype 4 Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Treatment-Naive Genotype 4 The following pages include guidance for management of treatment-naive patients with genotype 4 infection. Treatment-Naive Genotype 4 Without Cirrhosis Treatment-Naive Genotype 4 With Compensated Cirrhosis Simplified HCV Treatment for Treatment-Naive Adults Without Cirrhosis Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 1 Treatment-Naive Genotype 4 Without Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Treatment-Naive Genotype 4 Without Cirrhosis Recommended and alternative regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for: Treatment-Naive Genotype 4 Patients Without Cirrhosis RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg)a 8 weeks I, A Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) 12 weeks I, A Daily fixed-dose combination of elbasvir (50 mg)/grazoprevir (100 mg) 12 weeks I, A Daily fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg)b 12 weeks I, A a Dosing is 3 coformulated tablets (glecaprevir [100 mg]/pibrentasvir [40 mg]) taken once daily. Please refer to the prescribing information. b An 8-week regimen can be considered in patients with favorable baseline characteristics (ie, no cirrhosis, HCV RNA <6 million IU/mL, and absence of genotype 4r). Recommended Regimens Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir Based on favorable data for 12 weeks of treatment for noncirrhotic patients in part 4 of the phase 2 SURVEYOR-2 study (100% SVR12 in 34 patients with genotype 4, 5, or 6) (Kwo, 2017b), ENDURANCE-4 enrolled 121 DAA-naive or -experienced (sofosbuvir plus ribavirin ± peginterferon) genotype 4, 5, or 6 patients without cirrhosis to receive 12 weeks of the daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg) administered as three 100 mg/40 mg fixed-dose combination pills (Asselah, 2018b). Of those enrolled, 86% had fibrosis stage F0 to F1 and 68% were treatment naive. The genotype distribution was 63% genotype 4, 21% genotype 5, and 16% genotype 6. The overall SVR12 rate for the intention-to-treat population was 99% (120/121), including 99% (75/76) for genotype 4, 100% for genotype 5 (26/26), and 100% (19/19) for genotype 6. Genotype 4, 5, and 6 patients were not included in the randomized study to compare an 8-week versus 12-week course of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for DAA-naive, noncirrhotic patients. However, part 4 of the SURVEYOR-2 study investigated an 8-week course of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in DAA-naive patients without cirrhosis (Asselah, 2018b). In the intention-to- treat analysis, 93% (43/46) of patients with genotype 4, 100% (2/2) with genotype 5, and 90% (9/10) with genotype 6 achieved SVR12; there were no known virologic failures. EXPEDITION-1 investigated use of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in treatment-naive (75%) or -experienced (interferon or peginterferon ± ribavirin, or sofosbuvir plus ribavirin ± peginterferon) patients with compensated cirrhosis. Of 146 patients with genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 given 12 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir, 99% (145/146) achieved SVR12, including 100% (16/16) with genotype 4, 100% (2/2) with genotype 5, and 100% (7/7) with genotype 6 (Forns, 2017). Based on these studies, glecaprevir/pibrentasvir was approved for treatment of genotype 4-infected, DAA-naive, noncirrhotic patients for a HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 2 Treatment-Naive Genotype 4 Without Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) duration of 8 weeks. A meta-analysis of real-world cohorts that examined glecaprevir/pibrentasvir treatment response among adults demonstrated an SVR12 of 98.3% (n=55) among noncirrhotic participants with genotype 4 infection with 8 weeks of treatment (Lampertico, 2020). Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir The daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) for 12 weeks was approved by the FDA for the treatment of genotype 4 infection in patients with or without cirrhosis. ASTRAL-1 included 64 genotype 4-infected, treatment-naive patients without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis, all of whom achieved SVR12 (100%) (Feld, 2015 ). The POLARIS-2 phase 3 study randomized DAA-naive patients to 8 weeks of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/voxilaprevir (100 mg) versus 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir. Of 57 patients with genotype 4 in the sofosbuvir/velpatasvir arm, 98% achieved SVR and 1 patient experienced relapse (Jacobson, 2017). A real‐world, pooled analysis of 12 cohorts that evaluated adults treated with 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir demonstrated an SVR of 99.6% (238/239) among participants with genotype 4, with or without compensated cirrhosis (Mangia, 2020). Elbasvir/Grazoprevir The phase 3 C-EDGE treatment-naive trial of elbasvir/grazoprevir included 18 patients with genotype 4 infection. With 12 weeks of therapy, SVR was 100% (18/18) (Zeuzem, 2015). A similar SVR12 of 96% (54/56) was seen in treatment-naive patients with genotype 4 infection from the combined phase 2/3 elbasvir/grazoprevir database of HIV/HCV-coinfected patients treated for 12 weeks (Rockstroh, 2015). An integrated analysis of a phase 2/3 trial evaluated elbasvir/grazoprevir with or without ribavirin among 111 treatment- naive patients with genotype 4 infection (predominantly subtype 4a and 4d); 26% of participants had HIV/HCV coinfection and 13% had cirrhosis. Elbasvir/grazoprevir without ribavirin for 12 weeks resulted in an SVR12 of 96% (97/101) (Asselah, 2018c). Baseline RASs and subtype did not appear to impact SVR12 rates. In a study among treatment-naive participants with genotype 4 infection that compared 8 weeks versus 12 weeks of elbasvir/grazoprevir treatment for those with F0 to F2 fibrosis (all with F3 to F4 fibrosis received 12 weeks of treatment), SVR rates were 94% (50/53) in the 8-week arm and 96% (26/27) in the 12-week arm (Asselah, 2020). Ledipasvir/Sofosbuvir In the HEPNED-001 study from the Netherlands, 40 treatment-naive, noncirrhotic patients with (n=30) and without (n=10) HIV coinfection were treated with ledipasvir/sofosbuvir for 8 weeks; 93% (28/30) of HIV/HCV-coinfected patients and 100% (10/10) of HCV-monoinfected patients achieved SVR12 (Boerekamps, 2019). Patients were predominantly infected with genotypes 4a and 4d; 2.5% each were infected with 4c and 4t. In another study that evaluated 8 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir among treatment-naive, noncirrhotic patients from Saudi Arabia with genotype 4 infection, SVR12 was 98% (Babatin, 2019). Notably, 91% of patients had a baseline HCV RNA level <6 million IU/mL. These pilot studies support the use of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir in patients with genotype 4 infection, with 8-weeks therapy a consideration for those with favorable characteristics (ie, no cirrhosis, HCV RNA <6 million IU/mL, and absence of genotype 4r). In a study from Rwanda, 300 treatment-naive patients with genotype 4 infection were treated with ledipasvir/sofosbuvir for 12 weeks. The major subtypes among participants were 4k (n=134), 4r (n=48), 4q (n=42), and 4v (n=24). Overall SVR was 87% with subtype differences evident; SVR for 4r infection was 56% compared to 93% for other subtypes (Gupta, 2019). The influence of subtype on SVR warrants consideration of the use of ledipasvir, although 4r is rare in non-African populations. Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 2 Treatment-Naive Genotype 4 With Compensated Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Treatment-Naive Genotype 4 With Compensated Cirrhosis Recommended and alternative regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for: Treatment-Naive Genotype 4 Patients With Compensated Cirrhosisa RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) 12 weeks I, A Daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg)b 8 weeksc I, B Daily fixed-dose combination of elbasvir (50 mg)/grazoprevir (100 mg) 12 weeks IIa, B Daily fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) 12 weeks IIa, B a For decompensated cirrhosis, please refer to the appropriate section. b Dosing is 3 coformulated tablets (glecaprevir [100 mg]/pibrentasvir [40 mg]) taken once daily. Please refer to the prescribing information. c For HIV/HCV-coinfected patients, a treatment duration of 12 weeks is recommended. Recommended Regimens Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir The daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) for 12 weeks was approved by the FDA for the treatment of genotype 4 infection in patients with or without cirrhosis. ASTRAL-1 included 64 genotype 4-infected, treatment-naive patients without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis, all of whom achieved SVR12 (100%) (Feld, 2015 ). The POLARIS-2 phase 3 study randomized DAA-naive patients (19% with compensated cirrhosis, overall) to 8 weeks of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/voxilaprevir (100 mg) or 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir. Of 57 patients with genotype 4 in the sofosbuvir/velpatasvir arm, 98% achieved SVR and 1 patient experienced relapse (Jacobson, 2017). A real-world, pooled analysis of 12 cohort studies demonstrated an SVR of 100% (38/38) among adults with genotype 4 infection and compensated cirrhosis who were treated with 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir (Mangia, 2020). Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir EXPEDITION-1 was a multicenter, open-label, single-arm, phase 3 trial that enrolled 146 treatment-naive or -experienced (interferon or peginterferon ± ribavirin, or sofosbuvir plus ribavirin ± peginterferon) patients with genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 infection and compensated cirrhosis. Patients received the daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg) administered as three 100 mg/40 mg fixed-dose combination pills for 12 weeks. Across all HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 2 Treatment-Naive Genotype 4 With Compensated Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) genotypes, 99% (145/146) achieved SVR12 (Forns, 2017). EXPEDITION-1 included 16 treatment-naive and -experienced genotype 4-infected participants with compensated cirrhosis. All 16 patients achieved SVR12. Baseline NS5A RASs were detected by next-generation sequencing (using a 15% detection cutoff) in 40% of 133 tested participants. Baseline NS5A RASs had no effect on SVR12 rates among treatment-naive and -experienced participants with genotype 4. Based on this study, a 12-week course of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir is recommended for genotype 4-infected, treatment-naive patients with compensated cirrhosis. EXPEDITION-8 evaluated 8 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir among 280 treatment-naive patients with compensated cirrhosis and genotype 1, 2, 4 (n=13), 5, or 6 infection. SVR12 was 99% with no virologic failures (Brown, 2018). Patients with a prior history of decompensation, hepatocellular carcinoma, and HIV or HBV coinfection were excluded from the study. Elbasvir/Grazoprevir In an integrated analysis of phase 2/3 trials, 15 treatment-naive patients with genotype 4 infection and cirrhosis were treated with 12 weeks of elbasvir/grazoprevir with or without ribavirin, resulting in an SVR of 96% (Asselah, 2018c). Ledipasvir/Sofosbuvir The SYNERGY trial was an open-label study evaluating 12 weeks of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) in 21 genotype 4 patients, of whom 60% were treatment naive and 43% had advanced fibrosis (Metavir stage F3 or F4) (Kohli, 2015). One patient took the first dose and then withdrew consent. The 20 patients who completed treatment all achieved SVR12; thus, the SVR12 was 95% in the intention-to-treat analysis and 100% in the per-protocol analysis. Another open- label, single-arm study evaluating 12 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir that included 22 genotype 4, treatment-naive patients (one with cirrhosis) reported an SVR12 of 95% (21/22) in this patient population (Abergel, 2016). Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 2 Treatment-Naive Genotype 5 or 6 Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Treatment-Naive Genotype 5 or 6 Recommended and alternative regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for: Treatment-Naive Genotype 5 or 6 Patients With and Without Compensated Cirrhosisa RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg)b 8 weeks I, Ac Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) 12 weeks I, B Daily fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg)d 12 weeks IIa, B a For decompensated cirrhosis, please refer to the appropriate section. b Dosing is 3 coformulated tablets (glecaprevir [100 mg]/pibrentasvir [40 mg]) taken once daily. Please refer to the prescribing information. c For compensated cirrhosis, rating is I, B. d Not recommended for genotype 6e if subtype is known. Recommended Regimens Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir Based on favorable data for 12 weeks of treatment for noncirrhotic patients in the phase 2 SURVEYOR-2 study (100% SVR12 in 34 patients with genotype 4, 5, or 6) (Kwo, 2017b), ENDURANCE-4 enrolled 121 DAA-naive or -experienced (sofosbuvir plus ribavirin ± peginterferon) genotype 4, 5, or 6 patients without cirrhosis to receive 12 weeks of the daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg) administered as three 100 mg/40 mg pills (Asselah, 2018b). Of those enrolled, 86% had fibrosis stage F0 to F1 and 68% were treatment naive. The genotype distribution was 63% genotype 4, 21% genotype 5, and 16% genotype 6. The overall SVR12 rate for the intention-to-treat population was 99% (120/121), including 99% (75/76) for genotype 4, 100% for genotype 5 (26/26), and 100% (19/19) for genotype 6. Genotype 4, 5, and 6 patients were not included in the randomized study to compare an 8-week vs 12-week course for DAA-naive, noncirrhotic patients. However, part 4 of the SURVEYOR-2 study investigated an 8-week course of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in DAA-naive patients without cirrhosis (Asselah, 2018b). In the intention-to-treat analysis, 2/2 with genotype 5 and 9/10 with genotype 6 achieved SVR12; there were no known virologic failures. Further, ENDURANCE-5,6 was a phase 3b, single-arm, open-label, multicenter study of the efficacy of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir among DAA-naive patients with genotype 5 (n=23) or 6 (n=61) infection. Participants without cirrhosis received an 8-week regimen; those with cirrhosis (11% of patients) received 12 weeks of treatment (Asselah, 2019). Overall SVR was 98% with 2 virologic failures; treatment failed in a patient with genotype 6f and cirrhosis, and in another noncirrhotic participant with genotype 5a. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 3 Treatment-Naive Genotype 5 or 6 Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) In addition, EXPEDITION-1 investigated the use of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in DAA-naive (75%) or -experienced (interferon or peginterferon ± ribavirin, or sofosbuvir plus ribavirin ± peginterferon) patients with compensated cirrhosis. Of 146 patients with genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 given 12 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir, 99% (145/146) achieved SVR12, including 100% (2/2) with genotype 5 and 100% (7/7) with genotype 6 (Forns, 2017). Based on these studies, glecaprevir/pibrentasvir was approved for an 8-week course (noncirrhotic) and 12-week course (cirrhotic) of treatment for people with genotype 5 or 6 infection. EXPEDITION-8 evaluated 8 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir among 280 treatment-naive patients with compensated cirrhosis and genotype 1, 2, 4, 5 (n=1) or 6 (n=9) infection. SVR12 was 99% with no virologic failures (Brown, 2018). Patients with a prior history of decompensation, hepatocellular carcinoma, and HIV or HBV coinfection were excluded from the study. An integrated analysis of the 181 participants with genotype 5 or 6 from phase 2/3 studies including those above showed comparable response rates between 8 weeks and 12 weeks of treatment with no signal of poorer performance among cirrhotic patients with an 8-week regimen (Yao, 2020). Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir The daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) for 12 weeks was approved by the FDA for the treatment of genotype 5 and 6 infection in patients with and without cirrhosis (Feld, 2015). ASTRAL-1 included 24 genotype 5 treatment-naive participants with and without cirrhosis, 96% (23/24) of whom achieved SVR12. The study also included 38 genotype 6 treatment-naive participants with and without cirrhosis, all of whom achieved SVR12. An additional 9 genotype 6 patients received sofosbuvir/velpatasvir in the POLARIS-2 phase 3 study, all of whom achieved SVR (Jacobson, 2017). Two real-world cohort studies evaluated 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir among predominantly treatment-naive patients with genotype 6 infection. SVR was 100% in a cohort of patients (n=23) from Southwest China, none of whom had clinical cirrhosis (Wu, 2019). SVR was also 100% in a cohort of predominantly Vietnamese patients (n=43) residing in the United States, 12% of whom had cirrhosis (Nguyen, 2019). A real‐world, pooled analysis of 12 cohorts that evaluated adults treated with 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir demonstrated an SVR of 98.5% (67/68) among participants with genotype 5 or 6 infection; all 13 participants with compensated cirrhosis achieved SVR (Mangia, 2020). Ledipasvir/Sofosbuvir Although there are limited data on patients with genotype 5 infection, the in-vitro activity of sofosbuvir and ledipasvir are quite good with EC50 of 15 nM and 0.081 nM, respectively. An open-label, single-arm study that included 41 genotype 5-infected patients demonstrated an overall SVR12 rate of 95% (39/41) (Abergel, 2016). The SVR12 rate was also 95% specifically among treatment-naive patients (20/21), of whom only 3 had cirrhosis but all achieved SVR12. Ledipasvir has in-vitro activity against most genotype 6 subtypes, except for 6e (Wong, 2013); (Kohler, 2014). A small, 2-center, open-label study (NCT01826981) investigated the safety and in vivo efficacy of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir for 12 weeks in treatment-naive and -experienced patients with genotype 6 infection. Twenty-five patients (92% treatment- naive) who were primarily Asian (88%) had infection from 7 different subtypes (32% 6a; 24% 6e; 12% 6l; 8% 6m; 12% 6p; 8% 6q; 4% 6r). Two patients (8%) had cirrhosis. The SVR12 rate was 96% (24/25), and the single patient who experienced relapse had discontinued therapy at week 8 because of drug use. No patient discontinued treatment owing to adverse events (Gane, 2015). In the largest US study, 60 patients with genotype 6 infection were randomized to 8 weeks (treatment-naive, no cirrhosis) or 12 weeks (treatment-naive or -experienced, with or without cirrhosis) of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir; SVR rates were 95% in both treatment groups (Nguyen, 2017). A real-world cohort of 92 treatment-naive patients with genotype 6 infection (predominantly Vietnamese patients residing in the United States, 51% with cirrhosis) was treated with 12 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir; SVR12 was 96.6% (Nguyen, 2019). Subtype data were not available. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 3 Treatment-Naive Genotype 5 or 6 Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) A recent systematic review that examined the response to DAA therapy among persons with genotype 6 infection highlighted the heterogeneity of SVR rates in response to ledipasvir/sofosbuvir treatment across Asian countries (64% in Myanmar versus 100% in Vietnam) (Mettikanont, 2019). The reasons for this difference are likely multiple; the variable distribution of subtypes within the populations is a potential explanation. Pending more data, a conservative approach is recommended, with subtype 6e patients best treated with an alternative regimen. Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 3 Retreatment of Persons in Whom Prior Therapy Failed Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Retreatment of Persons in Whom Prior Therapy Failed This section provides guidance on the retreatment of persons with chronic HCV infection in whom prior therapy failed. The level of the evidence available to inform the best regimen for each patient and the strength of the recommendation vary and are rated accordingly (see Methods Table 2). In addition, specific recommendations are given when treatment differs for a particular group (e.g., those infected with different viral genotypes). Recommended regimens are those that are favored for most patients in that group based on optimal efficacy, favorable tolerability and toxicity profiles, complexity, and shorter treatment duration. Alternative regimens are those that are effective but, relative to recommended regimens, have potential disadvantages, limitations for use in certain patient populations, or less supporting data. In certain situations, an alternative regimen may be optimal for a specific patient. Specific considerations for pediatric patients; persons with HIV/HCV coinfection; decompensated cirrhosis (moderate or severe hepatic impairment; Child-Turcotte-Pugh [CTP] class B or C); HCV infection post liver transplantation; and severe renal impairment, end-stage renal disease (ESRD), or HCV infection post kidney transplantation are addressed in other sections of the guidance. Recommended and alternative regimens are listed in order of level of evidence. When several regimens are at the same recommendation level, they are listed in alphabetical order. Regimen choice should be determined based on patient- specific data, including drug interactions. Persons receiving antiviral therapy require careful pretreatment assessment for comorbidities that may influence treatment response. All patients require careful monitoring during treatment, particularly for anemia if ribavirin is included in the regimen (See Monitoring section). Scope and Need for Direct Acting Antiviral (DAA) Failure Retreatment Despite the enormous success of DAA therapy, a small percent of patients who fail to achieve SVR with DAA treatment will require retreatment. To simplify and consolidate the guidance, this section no longer contains retreatment recommendations for interferon or interferon plus first-generation protease inhibitor failures because the cure rates with modern DAA regimens in these populations are comparable to treatment-naïve patients. In addition, pangenotypic regimens without the addition of ribavirin have shown high efficacy for patients with prior failure across all genotypes except genotype 3. Therefore, recommendations are categorized by regimen failure. Prior DAA exposure may result in the selection of resistance-associated substitutions (RASs), particularly in NS5A, which could theoretically compromise the retreatment regimen. To date, however, a negative impact of NS5A RASs on the efficacy of retreatment regimens consisting of 3 DAAs with unique mechanisms of action (e.g., sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir or sofosbuvir plus glecaprevir/pibrentasvir) has not been demonstrated in clinical trials. Persons experiencing multiple DAA regimen failures with complex RAS patterns in NS3 and/or NS5A represent a unique and understudied population where RASs may impact treatment response. For a full discussion, see HCV Resistance Primer section. The following pages include guidance for management of treatment-experienced patients in the following categories: Sofosbuvir-based and elbasvir/grazoprevir treatment failures, including: Sofosbuvir/ribavirin ± interferon Sofosbuvir/ledipasvir HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 2 Retreatment of Persons in Whom Prior Therapy Failed Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir Elbasvir/grazoprevir Glecaprevir/pibrentasvir treatment failures Multiple DAA regimen failures, including: Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir Sofosbuvir plus glecaprevir/pibrentasvir Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 2 Sofosbuvir-Based and Elbasvir/Grazoprevir Treatment Failures Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Sofosbuvir-Based and Elbasvir/Grazoprevir Treatment Failures In general, persons who have experienced treatment failure with a sofosbuvir-based regimen should be retreated with 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir. The main exception is persons with genotype 3 and cirrhosis, in whom addition of ribavirin to sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir for 12 weeks is recommended. Sixteen weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir is an alternative regimen. Elbasvir/grazoprevir treatment failure patients should also be retreated with 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir. However, glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for 16 weeks is not recommended as an alternative for this group of patients. Recommended and alternative regimens listed by evidence level and alphabetically for: Sofosbuvir-Based Treatment Failures, With or Without Compensated Cirrhosisa RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/voxilaprevir (100 mg)b 12 weeks I, A ALTERNATIVE DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg) except for NS3/4 protease inhibitor inclusive combination DAA regimen failuresc Not recommended for genotype 3 infection with sofosbuvir/NS5A inhibitor experience. 16 weeks I, A a For decompensated cirrhosis, please refer to the appropriate section. b Genotype 3: Add weight-based ribavirin if cirrhosis is present and there are no contraindications. c This regimen is not recommended for patients with prior exposure to an NS5A inhibitor plus NS3/4 PI regimens (e.g., elbasvir/grazoprevir). Recommended Regimen Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir/Voxilaprevir The placebo-controlled, phase 3 POLARIS-1 trial evaluated a 12-week course of the daily fixed-dose combination of HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 3 Sofosbuvir-Based and Elbasvir/Grazoprevir Treatment Failures Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/voxilaprevir (100mg) in 263 persons with a prior NS5A inhibitor-containing DAA regimen failure. The majority (55%) had experienced a sofosbuvir/ledipasvir failure (Bourliere, 2017). Virologic failure was rare (2%; 3/145) among those retreated with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir. All 3 individuals whose retreatment failed had cirrhosis; 2 persons had genotype 1a and 1 had genotype 4d. The treatment-failure patients with genotype 1a also had baseline RASs at Q80K, Z30T, and Y93H. In the same study, a small number of persons who had a prior treatment failure with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir were retreated with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir. Two patients experienced virologic failure. Both had cirrhosis, genotype 3, and the Y93H RAS in the NS5A region at baseline. Because of the higher failure rates in the subgroup of genotype 3 patients with cirrhosis, the regimen of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir plus ribavirin for 12 weeks is recommended. If ribavirin cannot be used, extension to 24 weeks can be considered. Several real-world cohort reports also identified lower response rates after sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir retreatment for 12 weeks in persons with genotype 3 and cirrhosis, lending further support to the need for regimen modification (Papaluca, 2021); (Llaneras, 2019). Serious adverse events were similar in the placebo and treatment arms; a single patient discontinued therapy due to an adverse event. Headache, diarrhea, and nausea were more common in those participants receiving sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir compared to placebo. Results from deferred treatment of the placebo arm in POLARIS-1 further support the high efficacy of 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir for retreatment of persons with a prior sofosbuvir/NS5A inhibitor treatment failure (Bourliere, 2018). Overall SVR in the deferred treatment group was 97% (n=147), including 96% SVR (n=76) in those with prior sofosbuvir/NS5A inhibitor experience (n=76). The phase 3, open-label, randomized clinical trial POLARIS-4 compared a 12-week course of the daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir to 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir in NS5A inhibitor-naive, DAA- experienced patients (Bourliere, 2017). Eleven percent had prior exposure to simeprevir/sofosbuvir. Cirrhosis was common, 46% in both arms. SVR12 rates were higher for sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir (98%; 178/182) compared to sofosbuvir/velpatasvir (90%; 136/151). This study supports sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir as a recommended regimen for patients with a prior treatment failure with a sofosbuvir-containing regimen, regardless of the presence of compensated cirrhosis. Data from both clinical trials (Bourliere, 2018); (Bourliere, 2017) and real-world cohorts (Da, 2020); (Belperio, 2019); (Degasperi, 2019); (Llaneras, 2019) that evaluated the efficacy and safety of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir among DAA-experienced persons support the use of this regimen for persons with a prior DAA treatment failure. A more recent real-world evaluation of 144 patients from the UK who were retreated with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir following virologic failure with first-line DAA treatment regimens found an overall retreatment SVR12 of 90 percent (Smith, 2021b). Interestingly, pre-retreatment RASs were not associated with SVR when HCV genotype was taken into account. Patients with genotype 3, persons with cirrhosis, and those who had sofosbuvir/velpatasvir failure had significantly lower re- treatment response with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir. Possibly alternative or longer re-treatment regimens should be considered in such persons. In resource-limited countries where sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir in not available, innovative retreatment regimens using first-generation DAAs often proved successful (i.e., after a failure to NS5a/SOF in HCV genotype 1, switching to sofosbuvir when reused in combination with a new DAA class such as a protease inhibitor) (Dietz, 2021). Alternative Regimen Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir In parts 1 and 2 of the MAGELLAN-1 trial, 42 patients with genotype 1 who had previously been treated with either an NS5A inhibitor or an NS3/4A protease inhibitor were retreated with glecaprevir/pibrentasvir (Poordad, 2018); (Poordad, 2017). Twenty-four percent of the study participants had cirrhosis; 79% had genotype 1a. In the subgroup of persons previously treated with an NS5A inhibitor (ledipasvir or daclatasvir) and not concomitantly treated with a NS3/4A protease inhibitor, the daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg) for 16 weeks achieved an SVR of 94% (16/17). The single patient who did not respond to therapy had an on-treatment virologic failure. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 3 Sofosbuvir-Based and Elbasvir/Grazoprevir Treatment Failures Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) A phase 3b open-label study further supports the efficacy of 16 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for retreatment of individuals with genotype 1 infection and a history of sofosbuvir/NS5A inhibitor treatment failure (Lok, 2019). The study randomized sofosbuvir/NS5A inhibitor-experienced, genotype 1 patients without cirrhosis to 12 weeks (n=78) or 16 weeks (n=49) of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir. Participants with cirrhosis were randomized to 12 weeks (n=21) or 16 weeks (n=29) of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir plus weight-based ribavirin. Enrollment in the 12-week plus ribavirin arm for participants with cirrhosis was halted early due 2 viral breakthroughs on therapy and 1 case of early relapse. SVR was numerically higher in the 16-week study arms (94% and 97% without and with cirrhosis, respectively) compared to the 12-week arms (90% and 86% without and with cirrhosis, respectively). No clear impact of ribavirin was detected in the study and the majority of virologic failures were among those with genotype 1a treated for 12 weeks without ribavirin. No virologic failures were seen in genotype 1b patients. These data further support glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for 16 weeks as an efficacious retreatment approach for sofosbuvir/NS5A inhibitor experienced patients. Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir for Genotype 3 Sofosbuvir/Ribavirin Treatment Failures The SURVEYOR-II, part 3 trial evaluated the safety and efficacy of a 12-week or 16-week course of the daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg) among treatment-naive or interferon-experienced (standard or peginterferon ± ribavirin, or sofosbuvir plus ribavirin ± peginterferon), genotype 3 patients without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis. Among the 34 treatment-experienced participants with prior exposure to sofosbuvir who were treated for 16 weeks, regardless of cirrhosis status, SVR12 was 97% (33/34). The lone virologic failure was due to relapse in a patient with cirrhosis. No NS5A RASs were present prior to treatment; however, the L31F and Y93H substitutions were present at retreatment failure (Wyles, 2018). Sixteen weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir is an alternative regimen for genotype 3 patients with prior exposure to sofosbuvir plus ribavirin given the high SVR and lack of need for the addition of ribavirin. This regimen was not evaluated for genotype 3 patients who experienced a prior treatment failure with a regimen containing both sofosbuvir and an NS5A inhibitor. Given the lack of data this regimen is not recommended for genotype 3 infection with prior sofosbuvir/NS5A inhibitor experience. Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 3 Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir Treatment Failures Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir Treatment Failures Recommended regimens listed by evidence level and alphabetically for: Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir Treatment Failures (All Genotypes), With or Without Compensated Cirrhosisa RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg) plus daily sofosbuvir (400 mg) and weight-based ribavirin 16 weeks IIa, B Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/voxilaprevir (100 mg) 12 weeks IIa, B For patients with compensated cirrhosis, addition of weight-based ribavirin is recommended. 12 weeks IIa, C a For decompensated cirrhosis, please refer to the appropriate section. Recommended Regimens Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir Plus Sofosbuvir and Ribavirin For the small number of persons in whom treatment with the daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg) fails, the addition of ribavirin and sofosbuvir is an attractive retreatment option. MAGELLAN-3 evaluated the safety and efficacy of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in combination with sofosbuvir (400 mg) and weight-based ribavirin as a 12- or 16-week retreatment regimen for individuals who experienced virologic failure to glecaprevir/pibrentasvir (Wyles, 2019). Importantly, many study participants had received other regimens before their nonresponse to glecaprevir/pibrentasvir. Noncirrhotic, glecaprevir/pibrentasvir nonresponders with genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 who were naive to protease and NS5A inhibitors received 12 weeks glecaprevir/pibrentasvir plus sofosbuvir and weight- based ribavirin. Participants with genotype 3, and/or compensated cirrhosis, and/or protease or NS5A inhibitor experience (prior to their initial glecaprevir/pibrentasvir treatment) received 16 weeks of therapy with the same regimen. Overall, 96% (22/23) of these patients achieved SVR12 with a single relapse in a cirrhotic patient with genotype 1a. This individual had prior treatment failures with multiple other regimens and had multiple complex NS3 and NS5A RASs, including NS5A, Q30K, and Y93H prior to treatment. This study provides the rationale to recommend the combination of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir plus sofosbuvir and ribavirin for 16 weeks for persons without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis who experienced treatment failure with initial glecaprevir/pibrentasvir treatment. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 2 Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir Treatment Failures Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir/Voxilaprevir A prospective, nonrandomized observational study evaluated the efficacy of retreatment with 12 weeks of the daily fixed- dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/voxilaprevir (100 mg) among patients who experienced treatment failure with initial glecaprevir/pibrentasvir therapy (Pearlman, 2019). SVR12 was 94% (29/31). The cohort had higher proportions of patients with factors traditionally associated with virologic failure, including black race, cirrhosis, and genotype 3. Two patients relapsed at week 4 following the completion of therapy. One patient had genotype 3 infection, was noncirrhotic, and had an A30K mutation at baseline and at relapse. The other patient had genotype 1a infection, compensated cirrhosis, a Y93 variant detected at baseline, and L31M and Y93 variants at relapse. The addition of ribavirin was not evaluated in this study. For patients with cirrhosis, however, it may be helpful to add ribavirin based on prior studies of DAA failures. Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 2 Multiple DAA Treatment Failures (All Genotypes), Including Sofosbuvir Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Multiple DAA Treatment Failures (All Genotypes), Including Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir/Voxilaprevir or Sofosbuvir Plus Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir Recommended regimens listed by evidence level and alphabetically for: Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir/Voxilaprevir Treatment Failures, With or Without Compensated Cirrhosisa RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg) plus daily sofosbuvir (400 mg) and weight-based ribavirin 16 weeksb IIa, B Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/voxilaprevir (100 mg) plus weight-based ribavirin 24 weeks IIa, B a For decompensated cirrhosis, please refer to the appropriate section. b Extension of treatment to 24 weeks should be considered in extremely difficult cases (e.g., genotype 3 with cirrhosis) or failure following sofosbuvir plus glecaprevir/pibrentasvir. Recommended Regimens Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir Plus Sofosbuvir and Ribavirin There are limited data, mostly retrospective case series, on the re-treatment of DAA non-responders. Pibrentasvir has improved in vitro activity compared to other NS5A inhibitors against most NS5A RASs (Ng, 2017b). A small study demonstrated the efficacy (22/23 patients) of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir plus sofosbuvir and ribavirin for heavily DAA- experienced patients (including those with genotype 3 and/or cirrhosis), although no sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir failures were included (Wyles, 2019). Failure to respond to sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir is especially problematic. Dietz et al. described 40 such patients, 70% of whom had cirrhosis, and most not associated with specific RAS patterns following their sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir treatment. The investigators attempted re-treatment with a host of different rescue treatments, varying from 12-24 weeks, and reported an overall 81% SVR rate. Therefore, such innovative rescue treatments with “multiple targeted therapies” may be effective in most patients, but there remain individuals in need of newer options (Dietz, 2021b). There is 1 case report examining retreatment of patients in whom therapy with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir failed. In this study, a quad regimen of sofosbuvir, glecaprevir/pibrentasvir, and ribavirin for 24 weeks was successful (Bernhard, HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 2 Multiple DAA Treatment Failures (All Genotypes), Including Sofosbuvir Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) 2020). Another case report describes an individual (genotype 1a, cirrhosis) who failed multiple regimens (including 24 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir and 24 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir plus sofosbuvir and ribavirin) who was then treated variously with multiple DAA regimens for 52 weeks, who finally achieved an SVR (Trudeau, 2022). This case suggests that on-treatment protracted HCV RNA-negativity beyond 24 weeks might be necessary to allow for immune reconstitution and viral clearance for these most difficult-to-treat patients. Sixteen weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir plus sofosbuvir and ribavirin is recommended based on the improved resistance profile of pibrentasvir and high response rate seen with this duration of therapy among genotype 3 patients in the MAGELLAN-3 trial (Wyles, 2019). Extension to 24 weeks or longer with this regimen could be considered; while there are case report data using this duration (Bernhard, 2020); (Fierer, 2020), no clinical trial data are available to support such an approach. Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir/Voxilaprevir Plus Ribavirin Although there are no published studies examining retreatment of patients in whom therapy with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir failed, in the POLARIS-1 study—which studied sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir treatment among patients who had a prior DAA therapy failure—treatment failure with this triple antiviral regimen was seen more commonly in persons with cirrhosis (7% cirrhosis vs 1% without cirrhosis), and those with genotype 3 or 4 (5% genotype 3, 9% genotype 4 vs 0% genotype 1) (Bourliere, 2017). Baseline RASs did not affect SVR nor did failure select for additional RAS variants. The recommendation to treat with longer therapy in conjunction with ribavirin when retreating with the same DAA regimen (sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir) is based on extrapolation from prior studies showing benefit with this strategy in different populations (Gane, 2017). Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 2 Management of Unique & Key Populations With HCV Infection Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Management of Unique & Key Populations With HCV Infection The following pages include guidance for management of patients with HCV in unique and key populations. Patients With HIV/HCV Coinfection Patients With Decompensated Cirrhosis Patients Who Develop Recurrent HCV Infection Post Liver Transplantation Treatment of HCV-Uninfected Transplant Recipients Receiving Organs From HCV-Viremic Donors Patients With Renal Impairment Kidney Transplant Patients Management of Acute HCV Infection HCV in Pregnancy HCV in Children Key Populations: Identification and Management of HCV in People Who Inject Drugs HCV in Key Populations: Men Who Have Sex With Men HCV Testing and Treatment in Correctional Settings Last update: August 27, 2020 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 1 Patients With HIV/HCV Coinfection Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Patients With HIV/HCV Coinfection This section provides guidance on the treatment of chronic HCV infection in HIV/HCV-coinfected patients. For guidance regarding HIV/HCV-coinfected individuals with acute HCV infection, please see the Acute HCV section. HIV/HCV- coinfected patients suffer from more liver-related morbidity and mortality, nonhepatic organ dysfunction, and overall mortality than HCV-monoinfected patients (Lo Re, 2014); (Chen, 2009). Even in the potent HIV antiretroviral therapy (ART) era, HIV infection remains independently associated with advanced liver fibrosis and cirrhosis in patients with HIV/HCV coinfection (Fierer, 2013); (Kirk, 2013); (de Ledinghen, 2008); (Thein, 2008a). As such, HCV treatment in HIV-infected patients should be a priority for providers, payers, and patients. If HCV treatment is delayed for any reason, however, liver disease progression should be monitored at routine intervals as recommended in the guidance (see When and in Whom to Initiate Therapy, recommendation for repeat liver disease assessment). With the availability of HCV direct-acting antivirals (DAAs), efficacy and adverse event rates among persons with HIV/HCV coinfection are similar to those observed with HCV monoinfection (Rockstroh, 2018); (Bhattacharya, 2017); (Wyles, 2017b); (Naggie, 2015); (Rockstroh, 2015); (Sulkowski, 2015); (Wyles, 2015). Simplified HCV treatment has also been demonstrated to be effective in persons living with HIV. Recent data from a global sample of patients undergoing antiviral treatment for chronic HCV infection (MINMON study) suggested that a minimal monitoring approach was safe and achieved SVR at a rate comparable to that with standard monitoring (see Monitoring Patients Who Are Starting HCV Treatment, Are on Treatment, or Have Completed Therapy ). Of the 400 participants, 399 initiated sofosbuvir/velpatasvir treatment. At entry, 166 (42%) were living with HIV, and 94.6% achieved SVR, similar to those without HIV (95.3%) (Solomon, 2022). In addition to other exclusion criteria to simplified treatment, individuals receiving a TDF-containing regimen with eGFR < 60 ml/min should not receive simplified HCV treatment given the need for additional monitoring. Treatment of HIV/HCV-coinfected patients, however, requires continued awareness and attention to the complex drug- drug interactions that can occur between DAAs and antiretroviral medications. Drug interactions with DAAs and antiretroviral agents are summarized in the text and tables of this section as well as in the US Department of Health and Human Services HIV treatment guidelines (https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/en/guidelines/adult-and-adolescent-arv/whats-new-guidelines). The University of Liverpool drug interactions website (www.hep-druginteractions.org) is another resource for screening for drug-drug interactions with DAAs. Drug interactions should be carefully reviewed before proceeding with simplified HCV treatment in HIV/HCV coinfection. Risk for Hepatitis B Virus Reactivation Due to shared modes of transmission, HIV/HCV-coinfected patients are at risk for hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection. HBV reactivation has been reported in patients starting DAA HCV therapy who are not on active HBV agents. Consistent with general recommendations for the assessment of both HIV- and HCV-infected patients, all patients initiating HCV DAA therapy should be assessed for HBV coinfection with HBsAg, anti-HBs, and anti-HBc testing. HIV-infected patients with evidence of HBV infection should be on antiretroviral agents with activity against HBV, preferably tenofovir disoproxil fumarate or tenofovir alafenamide. For patients who are only anti-HBc positive and not on tenofovir-based ART, subsequent monitoring for HBV reactivation should be conducted as detailed in the Monitoring section. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 10 Patients With HIV/HCV Coinfection Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommendations Related to HCV Medication Interactions With HIV Antiretroviral Medications RECOMMENDED RATING Antiretroviral drug switches, when needed, should be done in collaboration with the HIV practitioner. For HIV antiretroviral and HCV direct-acting antiviral combinations not addressed below, expert consultation is recommended. I, A Daily fixed-dose combination of elbasvir (50 mg)/grazoprevir (100 mg) Elbasvir/grazoprevir should be used with antiretroviral drugs with which it does not have clinically significant interactions: abacavir, bictegravir, cabotegravir, dolutegravir, doravirine, emtricitabine, ibalizumab-uiyk, lamivudine, maraviroc, raltegravir, rilpivirine, and tenofovir. IIa, B Daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg)a Glecaprevir/pibrentasvir should be used with antiretroviral drugs with which it does not have clinically significant interactions: abacavir, bictegravir, cabotegravir, dolutegravir, doravirine, emtricitabine, fostemsavir, ibalizumab-uiyk, lamivudine, maraviroc, raltegravir, rilpivirine, and tenofovir. Given the increase in glecaprevir exposures and limited data on the safety of elvitegravir/cobicistat with glecaprevir/pibrentasvir, monitoring for hepatic toxicity is recommended until additional safety data are available in HIV/HCV-coinfected patients. IIa, B Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir can be used with most antiretrovirals but not efavirenz, etravirine, or nevirapine. Because tenofovir levels, when given as tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, may increase with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir, concomitant use mandates consideration of renal function and should be avoided in those with an eGFR <60 mL/min. Due to limited experience with this drug combination, renal monitoring is recommended in patients taking tenofovir disoproxil fumarate and cobicistat or ritonavir with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir. Tenofovir alafenamide may be an alternative to tenofovir disoproxil fumarate during sofosbuvir/velpatasvir treatment for patients who take cobicistat or ritonavir as part of their antiretroviral therapy. IIa, B Daily fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) Ledipasvir/sofosbuvir can be used with most antiretrovirals. Because this therapy increases tenofovir levels when given as tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, concomitant use mandates consideration of renal function and should be avoided in those with an eGFR <60 mL/min. Absolute tenofovir levels are highest and may exceed exposures for which there are established renal safety data when tenofovir disoproxil fumarate is administered with ritonavir- or cobicistat- containing regimens. Due to lack of sufficient safety data with this drug combination, consideration should be given to changing the antiretroviral regimen. If the combination is used, renal monitoring is recommended during the dosing period. Tenofovir alafenamide may be an alternative to tenofovir disoproxil fumarate during ledipasvir/sofosbuvir treatment for patients taking cobicistat or ritonavir as part of their antiretroviral therapy. IIa, C For combinations including tenofovir disoproxil fumarate wherein increased tenofovir levels are expected, baseline and ongoing assessment for tenofovir nephrotoxicity is recommended. IIa, C Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/voxilaprevir (100 mg) Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir should be used with antiretroviral drugs with which they do not have substantial interactions: abacavir, bictegravir, cabotegravir, dolutegravir, doravirine, IIa, B HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 10 Patients With HIV/HCV Coinfection Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommendations Related to HCV Medication Interactions With HIV Antiretroviral Medications emtricitabine, ibalizumab-uiyk, lamivudine, maraviroc, raltegravir, rilpivirine, and tenofovir alafenamide. Given increases in voxilaprevir AUC with darunavir/ritonavir or elvitegravir/cobicistat coadministration and lack of clinical safety data, monitoring for hepatic toxicity is recommended until additional safety data are available in HIV/HCV-coinfected patients. Because this therapy has the potential to increase tenofovir levels when given as tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, concomitant use mandates consideration of renal function and should be avoided in those with an eGFR <60 mL/min. In patients concomitantly receiving sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, renal monitoring is recommended during the dosing period. a Dosing is 3 coformulated tablets (glecaprevir [100 mg]/pibrentasvir [40 mg]) taken once daily. Please refer to the prescribing information. Regimens Not Recommended for Patients with HIV/HCV Coinfection NOT RECOMMENDED RATING Antiretroviral treatment interruption to allow HCV therapy is not recommended. III, A Elbasvir/grazoprevir should not be used with cobicistat, efavirenz, etravirine, nevirapine, or any HIV protease inhibitor. III, B Glecaprevir/pibrentasvir should not be used with atazanavir, efavirenz, etravirine, nevirapine, or ritonavir-containing antiretroviral regimens. III, B Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir should not be used with efavirenz, etravirine, or nevirapine. III, B Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir should not be used with efavirenz, etravirine, nevirapine, ritonavir- boosted atazanavir, or ritonavir-boosted lopinavir. III, B Sofosbuvir-based regimens should not be used with tipranavir. III, B Ribavirin should not be used with didanosine, stavudine, or zidovudine. III, B Clinical Trial, Pharmacokinetic, and Drug Interaction Data Extensive recommendations for ART use (including for persons anticipating HCV treatment) are available at https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/en/guidelines/adult-and-adolescent-arv/whats-new-guidelines. Antiretroviral drug switches may be performed to allow compatibility with DAAs with the goal of maintaining HIV suppression without compromising future options. Considerations include prior treatment history, response(s) to ART, resistance profiles, and drug tolerance (DHHS, 2021); (Gunthard, 2014). Treatment interruption in HIV/HCV-coinfected individuals is not recommended as it is associated with increased cardiovascular events (SMART, 2006) and increased rates of fibrosis progression and liver-related events (Thorpe, 2011); (Tedaldi, 2008). The availability of multiple effective HCV DAA and HIV antiretroviral regimens makes it possible for all HIV/HCV-coinfected patients to safely and successfully receive HCV treatment. Switching an optimized antiretroviral regimen carries risks, including adverse effects and HIV viral HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 10 Patients With HIV/HCV Coinfection Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) breakthrough (Eron, 2010). HIV viral breakthrough is of particular concern for those with substantial antiretroviral experience or known resistance to antiretroviral drugs. If necessary, ART changes should be undertaken in close collaboration with the treating HIV provider prior to HCV treatment initiation. Although fewer HIV/HCV-coinfected patients than HCV-monoinfected patients have been treated in DAA trials, efficacy rates to date have been remarkably similar between the groups (Rockstroh, 2018); (Dieterich, 2015); (Naggie, 2015); ( Osinusi, 2015); (Rockstroh, 2015); (Rodriguez-Torres, 2015); (Sulkowski, 2015); (Wyles, 2015); (Wyles, 2015b); (Dieterich, 2014b); (Sulkowski, 2014); (Sulkowski, 2013). Thus, results from HCV monoinfection studies largely justify the recommendations for HIV/HCV coinfection (discussed in the Initial Treatment, and Retreatment sections), which are generally similar to HCV monoinfection. Discussion specific to HIV/HCV coinfection research is included here. In general, few HIV/HCV-coinfected patients with compensated cirrhosis have been included in clinical trials of DAAs, and no data are available regarding HIV/HCV-coinfected patients with renal insufficiency or who have undergone solid organ transplantation. Despite the lack of data, it is highly likely that response rates are similar to those of HCV- monoinfected patients because no study to date in the DAA era has shown a lower efficacy for HIV/HCV-coinfected patients. Therefore, the respective guidance from these sections should be followed if treatment is otherwise warranted, with consideration of drug-drug interactions. Elbasvir/Grazoprevir The safety, tolerability, and efficacy of the second-generation NS3/4A serine protease inhibitor grazoprevir plus the NS5A inhibitor elbasvir were assessed in patients with HIV/HCV coinfection in the C-EDGE COINFECTION study. C-EDGE COINFECTION was a phase 3, nonrandomized, open-label, single-arm study in which treatment-naive patients with genotype 1, 4, or 6 and HIV coinfection (with or without compensated cirrhosis) were enrolled in Europe, the US, and Australia (Rockstroh, 2015). All patients were either naive to treatment with any ART and a CD4 cell count >500/mm3 (n=7), or stable on current ART for at least 8 weeks with a CD4 cell count >200/mm3 (n=211) and undetectable HIV RNA. All 218 enrolled patients received the once-daily fixed-dose combination of elbasvir (50 mg) plus grazoprevir (100 mg) for 12 weeks. All 218 patients completed follow-up at week 12. The median baseline CD4 cell count was 568/mm3 (range, 424-626/mm3). Limited antiretroviral regimens were allowed, specifically a nucleoside/nucleotide backbone of abacavir (21.6%) or tenofovir (75.2%) in combination with raltegravir (52%), dolutegravir (27%), or rilpivirine (17%). SVR12 was achieved by 96% (210/218) of patients (95% CI, 92.9-98.4). One patient did not achieve SVR12 for a nonvirologic reason and 7 patients without cirrhosis relapsed (2 subsequently confirmed as reinfections, highlighting the requirement of continued harm-reduction strategies after SVR). Thirty-five patients with compensated cirrhosis achieved SVR12. The most common adverse events were fatigue (13%; n=29), headache (12%; n=27), and nausea (9%; n=20). No patient discontinued treatment because of an adverse event. Three out of 6 patients who relapsed before SVR12 had NS3 and/or NS5A resistance-associated substitutions (RASs) while the others had wild type virus at the time of relapse. Two patients receiving ART had transient HIV viremia but subsequently returned to undetectable levels without a change in ART. No significant changes were observed with CD4 cell counts or new opportunistic infections. Elbasvir/grazoprevir without ribavirin appears effective and well tolerated among patients coinfected with HIV, with or without compensated cirrhosis. These data are consistent with previous trials of this regimen in the HCV monoinfected population (Zeuzem, 2017). Pharmacology and Drug Interaction Data Elbasvir is a substrate for CYP3A4 and the efflux transporter P-glycoprotein (P-gp). Grazoprevir is a substrate for CYP3A4, P-gp, and the liver uptake transporter OATP1B1. Moderate and strong CYP3A and P-gp inducers (including efavirenz) are not recommended for coadministration with elbasvir/grazoprevir. OATP1B1 inhibitors are also not recommended with grazoprevir. Elbasvir/grazoprevir is not compatible with any ritonavir- or cobicistat-boosted HIV protease inhibitor, elvitegravir/cobicistat, efavirenz, etravirine, or nevirapine (Feng, 2019). Drug interaction studies showed no clinically significant interactions between elbasvir/grazoprevir and dolutegravir, raltegravir, doravirine, rilpivirine, or tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (Ankrom, 2019); (Feng, 2019a); (Feng, 2019b); (Yeh, 2015b). HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 4 of 10 Patients With HIV/HCV Coinfection Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir The safety and efficacy of glecaprevir (a pangenotypic NS3/4A protease inhibitor) coformulated with pibrentasvir (a pangenotypic NS5A inhibitor) were evaluated in the phase 3, multicenter EXPEDITION-2 study (Rockstroh, 2018). This study evaluated 8 weeks of the daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg) among 137 HIV/HCV-coinfected adults without cirrhosis, and 12 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in 16 HIV/HCV-coinfected patients with compensated cirrhosis. Treatment-naive and -experienced patients with genotype 1, 2, 3, 4, or 6 infection were enrolled. Patients were either antiretroviral naive with a CD4 cell count ≥500/mm3, or on a stable ART regimen for at least 8 weeks with a CD4 cell count ≥200/mm3. ART drugs included raltegravir, dolutegravir, rilpivirine, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, tenofovir alafenamide, abacavir, emtricitabine, and lamivudine. One patient received elvitegravir/cobicistat. Overall SVR12 was 98% (136/136 among those without cirrhosis on the 8-week regimen, and 14/15 in those with compensated cirrhosis on the 12-week regimen). Four serious adverse events were reported, none of which were DAA related. One of these led to treatment discontinuation. The EXPEDITION-8 trial found that 8 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir achieved similar SVR rates to those achieved with 12 weeks of treatment in treatment-naive patients with cirrhosis (Brown, 2020). While persons with HIV were not included in this study, SVR rates are likely to be similar in PWH. Pharmacology and Drug Interaction Data Glecaprevir is metabolized by CYP3A as a secondary pathway, and glecaprevir and pibrentasvir are substrates for P-gp and breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP). Glecaprevir is also a substrate for the hepatic uptake transporter organic anion-transporting polypeptide (OATP) 1B1/3. Glecaprevir and pibrentasvir are weak inhibitors of CYP3A, CYP1A2, and uridine glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A1. Glecaprevir and pibrentasvir inhibit P-gp, BCRP, and OATP1B1/3. Compounds that inhibit P-gp, BCRP, or OATP1B1/3 may increase glecaprevir and pibrentasvir concentrations. In contrast, drugs that induce P-gp/CYP3A may decrease glecaprevir and pibrentasvir concentrations. Glecaprevir and pibrentasvir area under the curve (AUC) are increased roughly 3-fold and 1.57-fold, respectively, with tenofovir alafenamide/emtricitabine/elvitegravir/cobicistat (Kosloski, 2020). A single patient received this combination in the EXPEDITION-2 study. Although the increases in AUC of glecaprevir and pibrentasvir when coadministered with elvitegravir/cobicistat are not considered clinically relevant by the manufacturer or the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), due to lack of sufficient clinical safety data, close monitoring for hepatic toxicity is recommended until additional safety data are available in HIV/HCV-coinfected patients. Consider liver enzyme testing every 4 weeks. No clinically significant interactions were observed with glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in a drug interaction study with dolutegravir, raltegravir, rilpirivine, abacavir, lamivudine, emtricitabine, or tenofovir (Kosloski, 2020). Boosted protease inhibitors are not recommended with glecaprevir/pibrentasvir. Glecaprevir and pibrentasvir exposures were both at least 47% lower when coadministered with efavirenz compared to observed concentrations when given alone in other studies and, therefore, concomitant use is not recommended (Kosloski, 2020). Etravirine and nevirapine should not be used due to the potential for decreased glecaprevir/pibrentasvir exposures. Glecaprevir absorption is pH dependent and glecaprevir exposures are reduced approximately 50% with 40 mg of omeprazole daily. Despite the reduced glecaprevir exposures, pooled data from the phase 2/3 glecaprevir/pibrentasvir trials found that patients receiving proton pump inhibitors had similar SVR rates compared to patients not receiving a gastric acid modifier (Flamm, 2019). Ledipasvir/Sofosbuvir The safety and efficacy of 12 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir were evaluated in the phase 2, single-center, open-label ERADICATE trial, which included 50 HIV/HCV-coinfected patients with genotype 1 infection who were treatment naive without cirrhosis (Osinusi, 2015). Thirteen patients were not receiving ART and 37 patients were on protocol-allowed medications (tenofovir, emtricitabine, rilpivirine, raltegravir, and efavirenz). Although the inclusion criteria for patients receiving ART allowed CD4 cell counts >100/mm3, the median CD4 cell count was 576/mm3. Overall, 98% achieved HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 5 of 10 Patients With HIV/HCV Coinfection Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) SVR12 (13/13 in the treatment-naive arm and 36/37 in the treatment-experienced arm). There were no deaths, discontinuations, or clinically significant, serious adverse events. Renal function was monitored frequently during this trial and after administration of study drugs using a battery of tests (serum creatinine, eGFR, urinary beta-2 microglobulin, and urine protein and glucose). No clinically significant changes in these parameters or renal toxicity were observed. A larger study, ION-4, reported similar outcomes with ledipasvir/sofosbuvir (Naggie, 2015). A total of 335 HCV treatment- naive and -experienced HIV/HCV-coinfected patients were enrolled in the study and received ledipasvir/sofosbuvir once daily for 12 weeks. Patients received tenofovir disoproxil fumarate and emtricitabine with raltegravir (44%), efavirenz (48%), or rilpivirine (9%). Genotypes included were 1a (75%), 1b (23%), and 4 (2%). Twenty percent of patients had compensated cirrhosis, 34% were black, and 55% had not responded to prior HCV treatment. The overall SVR12 was 96% (321/335). Two patients had on-treatment virologic failure judged to be the result of nonadherence; 10 had virologic relapse after discontinuing treatment; 1 died from endocarditis associated with injection drug use; and 1 was lost to follow- up. SVR12 rates were 94% (63/67) among patients with compensated cirrhosis and 97% (179/185) among treatment- experienced patients. No patients discontinued the study drugs because of an adverse event. Although all patients had an eGFR >60 mL/min at study entry, drug interaction studies suggested that patients receiving tenofovir disoproxil fumarate could have increased tenofovir levels. There were 4 patients in whom serum creatinine level rose to ≥0.4 mg/dL. Two remained on tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, one had the tenofovir disoproxil fumarate dose reduced, and the other stopped taking tenofovir disoproxil fumarate. Neither the ERADICATE nor the ION-4 study investigators reported clinically significant changes in CD4 cell counts or HIV RNA levels. Thus, these data suggest that 12 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir is a safe and effective regimen for HIV/HCV- coinfected patients with genotype 1 infection taking selected ART (Naggie, 2015); (Osinusi, 2015). There are limited data regarding an 8-week course of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir in HIV/HCV-coinfected patients (Vega, 2019); (Isakov, 2018); (Ingiliz, 2016). Additionally, clinical trial data of daclatasvir (an NS5A inhibitor similar to ledipasvir) plus sofosbuvir in HIV/HCV- coinfected patients demonstrated a lower SVR rate (76%) with 8 weeks of treatment compared to 12 weeks (97%) (Wyles, 2015). Therefore, a shortened treatment course for HIV/HCV-coinfected persons is not recommended at this time. Pharmacology and Drug Interaction Data Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir are P-gp and BCRP substrates; ledipasvir is also an inhibitor of both P-gp and BCRP transporters. Ledipasvir absorption is pH dependent. Refer to product labeling for guidance on temporal separation and dosing of gastric acid modifying agents. Drug interaction studies of ledipasvir (with or without sofosbuvir) with antiretroviral drugs in uninfected persons did not identify clinically significant interactions with abacavir, bictegravir, dolutegravir, doravirine, emtricitabine, lamivudine, raltegravir, rilpivirine, or tenofovir alafanamide (Ankrom, 2019); (Garrison, 2018); (Garrison, 2015); (German, 2014). Ledipasvir AUC is decreased by 34% when coadministered with efavirenz-containing regimens and increased by 96% when coadministered with ritonavir-boosted atazanavir (German, 2014). No dose adjustments of ledipasvir are recommended to account for these interactions. Ledipasvir/sofosbuvir increases tenofovir levels when given as tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, which may increase the risk of tenofovir-associated renal toxicity. This combination should be avoided in patients with an eGFR <60 mL/min. With the addition of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir, tenofovir levels (when given as tenofovir disoproxil fumarate) are increased with efavirenz, rilpivirine (German, 2014), dolutegravir, ritonavir-boosted atazanavir, and ritonavir-boosted darunavir (German, 2015). The absolute tenofovir levels are highest and may exceed exposures for which there are established renal safety data when tenofovir disoproxil fumarate is administered with ritonavir- or cobicistat-containing regimens; consideration should be given to changing the antiretroviral regimen. Tenofovir alafenamide may be an alternative to tenofovir disoproxil fumarate during ledipasvir/sofosbuvir treatment for patients who take cobicistat or ritonavir as part of their ART. In patients with an eGFR <60 mL/min who are taking tenofovir disoproxil fumarate with ledipasvir/sofosbuvir, renal parameters should be checked at baseline and monthly while on ledipasvir/sofosbuvir. Baseline parameters should include creatinine level, electrolytes (including phosphorus), and urinary protein and glucose according to recent guidelines for the management of chronic kidney disease in those with HIV, which include indications for nephrology consultation (Lucas, 2014). A change in ART should be considered for those at high risk for renal toxicity—especially those with an eGFR between 30 mL/min and 60 mL/min or who have preexisting evidence of Fanconi syndrome, and HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 6 of 10 Patients With HIV/HCV Coinfection Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) particularly those taking tenofovir disoproxil fumarate and a ritonavir- or cobicistat-containing regimen. Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate should also be properly dosed and adjusted for eGFR at baseline and while on therapy (Lucas, 2014). Data are limited regarding the renal safety of tenofovir when given as tenofovir alafenamide with ledipasvir/sofosbuvir. However, a small pharmacokinetic study among persons with HIV on a boosted protease inhibitor and tenofovir alafenamide containing regimen found that the addition of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir did not worsen renal biomarkers (Brooks, 2020b). A study of tenofovir pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers receiving the combination of tenofovir alafenamide, emtricitabine, and cobicistat-boosted elvitegravir with ledipasvir/sofosbuvir found that tenofovir levels were only 20% of the typical tenofovir exposures seen with tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (Garrison, 2015). Based on these pharmacokinetic data in healthy volunteers, tenofovir alafenamide may be an alternative to tenofovir disoproxil fumarate during ledipasvir/sofosbuvir treatment for patients on ritonavir- or cobicistat-containing regimens. Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir The safety and efficacy of 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir were evaluated in a phase 3 study among 106 ART- controlled, HIV/HCV-coinfected patients (Wyles, 2017b). Patients with genotype 1, 2, 3, or 4 infection were included; 18% (19/106) had compensated cirrhosis. HIV was controlled on ART including non-nucleoside reverse-transcriptase inhibitor- (rilpivirine), integrase inhibitor- (raltegravir or elvitegravir/cobicistat), or ritonavir-boosted protease inhibitor- (atazanavir, lopinavir, or darunavir) based regimens with either tenofovir/emtricitabine or abacavir/lamivudine. Fifty-three percent (56/106) of participants were on tenofovir disoproxil fumarate with a pharmacologic boosting agent (ritonavir or cobicistat). Neither efavirenz nor etravirine were allowed in this study as concomitant dosing with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir in healthy volunteers resulted in clinically significant decreases in velpatasvir exposure. SVR12 was 95% with 2 relapses, both occurring in genotype 1a-infected patients. Similar results were noted in patients with compensated cirrhosis and in those with baseline NS5A RASs (n=12 at 15% threshold; SVR12=100%). There were no clinically significant changes in serum creatinine or eGFR, and no patients required a change in their ART during the study period. Pharmacology and Drug Interaction Data Velpatasvir is available only in a fixed-dose combination tablet with sofosbuvir. Velpatasvir is metabolized by CYP3A4, CYP2C8, and CYP2B6. It does not appear to inhibit or induce any CYP enzymes. Velpatasvir is a substrate for P-gp and BCRP, and inhibits P-gp, BCRP, and OATP1B1/1B3/2B1 but does not induce any transporters. Velpatasvir absorption is pH dependent. Refer to product labeling for guidance on temporal separation and dosing of gastric acid modifying agents. Drug interaction studies with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir have been performed in HIV and HCV seronegative volunteers. As with ledipasvir/sofosbuvir, tenofovir exposures are increased, which may be problematic for individuals with an eGFR <60 mL/min or in those receiving ritonavir- or cobicistat-containing ART with tenofovir disoproxil fumarate. Fifty-six HIV/HCV- coinfected individuals receiving the combination of tenofovir disoproxil fumarate with ritonavir- or cobicistat-containing ART were treated with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir in the ASTRAL-5 study with no difference in median creatinine clearance before and after sofosbuvir/velpatasvir treatment, however, poor renal function was an exclusion for this study (Wyles, 2017b). In individuals with an eGFR <60 mL/min and those requiring ritonavir- or cobicistat-containing ART, consider use of tenofovir alafenamide in place of tenofovir disoproxil fumarate. If the combination of tenofovir disoproxil fumarate with a ritonavir- or cobicistat-containing ART is required or in those with an eGFR <60 mL/min, renal parameters should be checked at baseline and monthly while on sofosbuvir/velpatasvir. Based on data from healthy volunteers, tenofovir pharmacokinetics are lower with tenofovir alafenamide relative to tenofovir disoproxil fumarate. Thus, tenofovir alafenamide may be an alternative to tenofovir disoproxil fumarate during sofosbuvir/velpatasvir treatment for patients who take cobicistat or ritonavir as part of their ART. However, there are no safety data for this combination in HIV/HCV-coinfected patients. Drug-drug interaction studies in healthy volunteers found no clinically significant interaction between sofosbuvir/velpatasvir and atazanavir/ritonavir, bictegravir, darunavir/ritonavir, dolutegravir, elvitegravir/cobicistat, lopinavir/ritonavir, raltegravir, rilpivirine, emtricitabine, or tenofovir alafenamide (Garrison, 2018); (Mogalian, 2018). HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 7 of 10 Patients With HIV/HCV Coinfection Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Velpatasvir exposures are significantly reduced with efavirenz and this combination is not recommended. Etravirine and nevirapine have not been studied with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir but are also not recommended. Indirect bilirubin level increases have been reported when sofosbuvir/velpatasvir was used in patients on atazanavir/ritonavir. These changes are not considered clinically significant. Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir/Voxilaprevir The data supporting use of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir are described in the Initial Treatment of HCV Infection and Retreatment of Persons in Whom Prior Therapy Has Failed sections. There are limited data on sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir in HIV/HCV-coinfected patients. The RESOLVE study included 17 individuals with HIV coinfection and a previous DAA treatment failure (Wilson, 2019). SVR12 was 82% by intention-to-treat analysis and 93% by per protocol analysis. While these data are limited, they suggest response rates in HIV/HCV-coinfected patients are similar to those of HCV-monoinfected patients. Therefore, the respective guidance from the aforementioned treatment and retreatment sections should be followed, with consideration of drug-drug interactions. Pharmacology and Drug Interaction Data Voxilaprevir is a substrate for P-gp, OATP1B1/3, BCRP, CYP3A, CYP1A2, and CYP2C8. Voxilaprevir inhibits OATP1B1/3, P-gp, and BCRP. Voxilaprevir AUC is increased 331% with ritonavir-boosted atazanavir and this combination is not recommended (Garrison, 2017). Voxilaprevir AUC is increased 171% with tenofovir alafenamide/emtricitabine/elvitegravir/cobicistat, and 143% with tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/emtricitabine and ritonavir- boosted darunavir. Although these increases in voxilaprevir AUC were not deemed clinically relevant by the manufacturer or the FDA, due to lack of clinical safety data, close monitoring for hepatic toxicity is recommended until additional safety data are available in HIV/HCV-coinfected patients. Consider liver enzyme testing every 4 weeks. Velpatasvir absorption is pH dependent. Velpatasvir AUC is reduced approximately 50% when given with omeprazole 20 mg daily as part of the fixed-dose sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir combination. Refer to product labeling for guidance on temporal separation and dosing of gastric acid modifying agents. Tenofovir concentrations are increased with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir when given as tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (Garrison, 2017). In individuals with an eGFR <60 mL/min, consider use of tenofovir alafenamide in place of tenofovir disoproxil fumarate in those requiring ritonavir- or cobicistat-containing ART. No substantial interactions were observed with bictegravir, emtricitabine, or rilpivirine. Table. Drug Interactions Between Direct-Acting Antivirals and Antiretroviral Drugs—Recommended Regimens Ledipasvir/ Sofosbuvir (LDV/SOF) Sofosbuvir/ Velpatasvir (SOF/VEL) Elbasvir/ Grazoprevir (ELB/GRZ) Glecaprevir/ Pibrentasvir (GLE/PIB) Sofosbuvir/ Velpatasvir/ Voxilaprevir (SOF/VEL/VO X) Protease Inhibitors Boosted Atazanavir A A Boosted Darunavir A A Boosted Lopinavir ND, A A ND NNRTIs Doravirine ND ND ND Efavirenz ND ND Rilpivirine HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 8 of 10 Patients With HIV/HCV Coinfection Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Ledipasvir/ Sofosbuvir (LDV/SOF) Sofosbuvir/ Velpatasvir (SOF/VEL) Elbasvir/ Grazoprevir (ELB/GRZ) Glecaprevir/ Pibrentasvir (GLE/PIB) Sofosbuvir/ Velpatasvir/ Voxilaprevir (SOF/VEL/VO X) Etravirine ND ND ND ND ND Integrase Inhibitors Bictegravir ND ND Cabotegravir ND ND ND ND ND Cobicistat- boosted elvitegravir C C C Dolutegravir ND Raltegravir ND Entry Inhibitors Fostemsavir ND ND ND ND ND Ibalizumab-uiyk ND ND ND ND ND Maraviroc ND ND ND ND ND NRTIs Abacavir ND ND ND Emtricitabine Lamivudine ND ND ND Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate B, C B, C C Tenofovir alafenamide D D ND D Green indicates coadministration is safe; yellow indicates a dose change or additional monitoring is warranted; and red indicates the combination should be avoided. ND: No data A: Caution only with tenofovir disoproxil fumarate B: Increase in tenofovir depends on which additional concomitant antiretroviral agents are administered. C: Avoid tenofovir disoproxil fumarate in patients with an eGFR <60 mL/min; tenofovir concentrations may exceed those with established renal safety data in individuals on ritonavir- or cobicistat-containing regimens. D: Studied as part of fixed-dose combinations with ledipasvir/sofosbuvir or sofosbuvir/velpatasvir plus TAF, emtricitabine, elvitegravir, and cobicistat. For antiretroviral agents not included in the table above, please refer to the US Department of Health and Human Services HIV treatment guidelines (https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/en/guidelines/adult-and-adolescent-arv/whats-new-guidelines) and/or the University of Liverpool drug interactions website (www.hep-druginteractions.org). HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 9 of 10 Patients With HIV/HCV Coinfection Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Treatment Recommendations for Patients With HIV/HCV Coinfection RECOMMENDED RATING HIV/HCV-coinfected persons should be treated and retreated the same as persons without HIV infection, after recognizing and managing interactions with antiretroviral medications (see Initial Treatment of HCV Infection and Retreatment of Persons in Whom Prior Therapy Has Failed). I, B Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 10 of 10 Patients With Decompensated Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Patients With Decompensated Cirrhosis Recommended for All Patients With HCV Infection Who Have Decompensated Cirrhosis RECOMMENDED RATING Patients with HCV infection who have decompensated cirrhosis—moderate or severe hepatic impairment, ie, Child-Turcotte-Pugh (CTP) class B or class C—should be referred to a medical practitioner with expertise in that condition, ideally in a liver transplant center. I, C Clinical trial data demonstrate that in the population of persons with decompensated cirrhosis, most patients receiving direct-acting antiviral (DAA) therapy experience improvement in clinical and biochemical indicators of liver disease between baseline and posttreatment week 12, including patients with CTP class C cirrhosis (Manns, 2016); (Welzel, 2016 ); (Charlton, 2015); (Curry, 2015). Improvements, however, may be insufficient to avoid liver-related death or the need for liver transplantation (Belli, 2016), highlighting that not everyone benefits from DAA therapy (Fernandez-Carrillo, 2016). Most deaths among those receiving DAA therapy relate to the severity of the underlying liver disease. Predictors of improvement or decline have not been clearly identified, although patients with a Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score >20 or severe portal hypertension complications may be less likely to improve and might be better served by transplantation than antiviral treatment (El-Sherif, 2018); (Terrault, 2017); (Belli, 2016). Real-world data comparing DAA response rates demonstrate that patients with cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) have lower SVR rates than cirrhotic patients without HCC (Beste, 2017); (Prenner, 2017). In a large VA study including sofosbuvir, ledipasvir/sofosbuvir, and paritaprevir/ritonavir/ombitasvir plus dasabuvir regimens (± ribavirin), overall SVR rates were 91% in patients without HCC versus 74% in those with HCC (Beste, 2017). After adjusting for confounders, the presence of HCC was associated with a lower likelihood of SVR (AOR=0.38). Whether this lower SVR can be overcome with an extended duration of therapy is unknown. In a real-world study, DAA-induced SVR was associated with reduced risk of clinical disease progression in patients with Child-Pugh A cirrhosis but not in those with Child-Pugh B/C cirrhosis. A ≥2 point decrease in MELD score among patients with Child-Pugh B/C cirrhosis was not associated with improved clinical outcome (Krassenburg, 2021). In a large, multicenter, real-world cohort of 642 patients with advanced cirrhosis (defined as cirrhosis and MELD score ≥10) treated with a variety of DAA regimens, the overall SVR12 rate was 90.5%. Age <60, male sex, ascites, serum albumin <3.5 mg/dL, hepatocellular carcinoma, proton-pump inhibitor use, MELD score <16, and CTP class B/C were significantly associated with decreased odds of SVR12. In long-term follow-up at a median of 4 years after the end of treatment, a clinically meaningful decrease in MELD score of ≥3 occurred in 29% and a final MELD score of <10 was achieved in 25%. These data highlight that a proportion of patients with advanced cirrhosis who receive DAA therapy may not achieve significant long-term improvement in liver function (Verna, 2020). A recent retrospective study conducted in HCV-infected patients with decompensated cirrhosis found that DAA therapy was associated with reduced all-cause mortality and non- liver related deaths. In the 88% of patients who achieved SVR, the risk of mortality, hepatocellular carcinoma and liver transplantation was also reduced (Pageaux, 2022). With the increased efficacy of DAAs in those with decompensated liver disease, a retrospective cohort study evaluated temporal trends, patient characteristics, and outcomes among adults with decompensated cirrhosis who were waitlisted HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 6 Patients With Decompensated Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) for liver transplantation between January 1, 2005 and December 31, 2018. Overall, listing rates for HCV patients have decreased in the DAA era. However, delisting due to clinical improvement remains low, although such delisting has increased in more recent times (6.1% for 2013–2017; 5.2% for 2009–2012; 4% for 2005–2008; p <0.001). Ascites persisted in 48.6% and encephalopathy in 30.5% of patients at delisting, indicating that significant morbidity may persist in some patients over the long term, despite SVR (Bittermann, 2020). Decompensated Cirrhosis Genotype 1-6 Recommended regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for: Patients With Decompensated Cirrhosisa Who Have Genotype 1-6 and Are Ribavirin Eligible RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Genotype 1-6: Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) with weight-based ribavirinb 12 weeks I, Ac Genotype 1, 4, 5, or 6 only: Daily fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) with low initial dose of ribavirin (600 mg, increase as tolerated to weight-based dose) 12 weeks I, Ad a Includes CTP class B and class C patients who may or may not be candidates for liver transplantation, including those with hepatocellular carcinoma. b Low initial dose of ribavirin (600 mg) is recommended for patients with CTP class C cirrhosis; increase as tolerated. c Only available data for genotype 6 are in patients with compensated cirrhosis. d Only available data for genotypes 5 and 6 are in a small number of patients with compensated cirrhosis. Recommended regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for: Patients With Decompensated Cirrhosisa Who Have Genotype 1-6 and Are Ribavirin Ineligible RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Genotype 1-6: Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) 24 weeks I, Ab Genotype 1, 4, 5, or 6 only: Daily fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) 24 weeks I, Ac a Includes CTP class B and class C patients who may or may not be candidates for liver transplantation, including those with hepatocellular carcinoma. b Only available data for genotype 6 are in patients with compensated cirrhosis. c Only available data for genotypes 5 and 6 are in a small number of patients with compensated cirrhosis. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 6 Patients With Decompensated Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommended regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for: Patients With Decompensated Cirrhosisa and Genotype 1-6 Infection in Whom Prior Sofosbuvir- or NS5A Inhibitor-Based Treatment Failed RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Genotype 1-6: Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) with weight-based ribavirinb 24 weeks II, Cc Prior sofosbuvir-based treatment failure, genotype 1, 4, 5, or 6 only: Daily fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) with low initial dose of ribavirin (600 mg; increase as tolerated) 24 weeks II, Cd a Includes CTP class B and class C patients who may or may not be candidates for liver transplantation, including those with hepatocellular carcinoma. b Low initial dose of ribavirin (600 mg) is recommended for patients with CTP class C cirrhosis. c Only available data for genotypes 5 and 6 are in a small number of patients with compensated cirrhosis. d Only available data for genotype 6 are in patients with compensated cirrhosis. Protease inhibitor-containing regimens (eg, glecaprevir, grazoprevir, paritaprevir, simeprevir, and voxilaprevir) are not recommended in patients with decompensated liver disease (see “Protease-Inhibitor Containing Regimens” discussion below for details). Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir The phase 3, open-label, multicenter, randomized ASTRAL-4 study enrolled 267 patients with genotype 1, 2, 3, 4, or 6 and decompensated cirrhosis (CTP class B at the time of screening) who were treatment naive (45%) or experienced (55%). Notably, 10% of patients were CTP class A or class C at treatment baseline. Patients were randomly assigned (1:1:1 ratio) to 12 weeks of a daily fixed-dose combination sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg); 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir plus weight-based ribavirin (1000 mg/d, weight <75 kg; 1200 mg/d, weight ≥75 kg); or 24 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir. Randomization was stratified by HCV genotype. All participants had a hemoglobin level >10 g/dL and an eGFR ≥50 mL/min (Curry, 2015b). The genotype/subtype distribution of the participants was 60% (159/267) genotype 1a; 18% (48/267) genotype 1b; 4% (12/267) genotype 2; 15% (39/267) genotype 3; 3% (8/267) genotype 4; and <1% (1/267) genotype 6. Ninety-five percent of patients had a baseline MELD score ≤15. SVR rates were 83% among those in the 12-week sofosbuvir/velpatasvir study arm, 94% in the 12-week sofosbuvir/velpatasvir plus ribavirin arm, and 86% in the 24-week sofosbuvir/velpatasvir arm. Among patients with genotype 1, the SVR rates were 88%, 96%, and 92%, respectively. Twenty-two participants had virologic failure, including 20 patients with relapse and 2 patients (genotype 3) with on-treatment virologic breakthrough. The presence of baseline NS5A resistant substitutions was not associated with virologic relapse. SVR rates among the 12 patients with CTP class B cirrhosis and genotype 2 were 100% (8/8) with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir for 12 weeks (with or without ribavirin), and 75% (3/4) with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir for 24 weeks. Among 39 patients with CTP class B cirrhosis with genotype 3, SVR rates were 50% (7/14) for 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir without ribavirin, 85% (11/13) for 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir plus ribavirin, and 50% (6/12) for 24 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir. Therefore, genotype 3 patients in particular appear to benefit from the addition of ribavirin to the regimen (Curry, 2015b). A recent real-world study investigated the safety and efficacy of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir with ribavirin in chronic genotype 1-6 HCV-related cirrhosis. All patients included were Childs-Pugh class B or C. After 12 weeks of treatment, of the 96% of patients who achieved SVR, 84.4% had improved Childs-Pugh scores and 64.6% had improved MELD scores. As such, the benefit of ribavirin therapy in addition to sofosbuvir/velpatasvir continues to be seen across all HCV genotypes (Liu, 2021). For patients with decompensated cirrhosis who are ribavirin ineligible, sofosbuvir/velpatasvir for 24 weeks is currently recommended, but additional studies HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 6 Patients With Decompensated Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) involving larger numbers of patients are needed to define the optimal duration of therapy. At posttreatment week 12, 47% of patients had an improvement in CTP score, 42% had no change, and 11% had an increased CTP score. Nine patients (3%) died due to various causes during the study; no deaths were judged to be related to antiviral therapy. Serious adverse events were reported in 16% to 19% of the treated patients. Anemia (ie, hemoglobin <10 g/dL) was reported in 23% of the group receiving ribavirin, and 8% and 9% in those who received 12 weeks and 24 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir without ribavirin, respectively. Recently, the efficacy of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir therapy was studied in genotype 1 and 2 HCV-infected patients with decompensated cirrhosis. A small number of patients was treated for 12 weeks with this dual therapy. Therefore, a shorter therapy duration of 12 weeks may be sufficient for patients with decompensated cirrhosis who are ribavirin ineligible (Tada, 2021). A real-world study that evaluated the safety and efficacy of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir (with or without ribavirin) demonstrated an SVR12 of 88% (intention-to-treat analysis) among patients with genotype 3 and decompensated cirrhosis; the treatment was noted to be safe (Wong, 2021). Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir has also been studied in a small number of patients with CTP class C cirrhosis. In a Japanese phase 3, open-label study of patients with CTP class B (77%) and CTP class C (20%) cirrhosis, 102 patients with genotype 1, 2, or 3 were randomized to 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir, with or without ribavirin (Takehara, 2019). Ribavirin dosing was weight based in CTP class B patients (600 mg/d ≤60 kg; 800 mg/d >60 to 80 kg; 1000 mg/d >80 kg) and 600 mg daily for all CTP class C patients. Overall SVR12 rates were 92% in each arm, but only 75% among patients with CTP class C cirrhosis. There are no data on the outcomes of patients with decompensated cirrhosis and a history of prior sofosbuvir plus an NS5A inhibitor failure. However, in a phase 2, open-label, single-arm study using 24 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir plus weight-based ribavirin among patients with a history of treatment failure with an NS5A inhibitor-containing regimen, among 69 patients (28% with compensated cirrhosis) treated with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir plus ribavirin for 24 weeks, SVR rates were 97% for genotype 1 (83% with compensated cirrhosis), 93% for genotype 2 (no patients with cirrhosis), and 78% for genotype 3 (75% with compensated cirrhosis) (Gane, 2017). To date, there are no data for this regimen given for 24 weeks in patients with decompensated cirrhosis. The phase 3, multicenter ASTRAL-1 trial evaluated the efficacy and safety of a 12-week course of daily fixed-dose sofosbuvir/velpatasvir among treatment-naive and -experienced patients with genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6. The study included 35 patients with genotype 5 and 41 patients with genotype 6 (Feld, 2015). Overall SVR12 rates were 97% (34/35) in genotype 5 patients and 100% (41/41) in those with genotype 6. Of note, 100% SVR12 was achieved in the small number of genotype 5 patients (n=5) and genotype 6 patients (n=6) with compensated cirrhosis enrolled in ASTRAL-1. Ledipasvir/Sofosbuvir The US-based, multicenter, randomized, open-label, phase 2 SOLAR-1 trial included 108 patients with genotype 1 or 4 and decompensated cirrhosis; 59 were categorized as CTP class B (score 7–9) and 49 were CTP class C (score 10–12). Participants were randomly assigned to 12 weeks or 24 weeks of the daily fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) plus ribavirin (initial dose of 600 mg, increased as tolerated) (Charlton, 2015b). After excluding the 7 patients who underwent liver transplantation during the study, SVR rates were 87% in CTP class B patients who received 12 weeks of treatment and 89% in those who received 24 weeks of treatment. Similarly, the SVR rates were 86% and 87%, respectively, with 12 weeks and 24 weeks of antiviral therapy in the CTP class C patients. Post-therapy virologic relapse occurred in 8% and 5% of the 12- and 24-week groups, respectively. In the majority of participants with CTP class B or C disease, the MELD and CTP scores decreased between baseline and posttreatment week 4. As expected, the frequency of serious adverse events increased with treatment duration in both the CTP class B group (10%, 12 weeks; 34%, 24 weeks) and the CTP class C group (26%, 12 weeks; 42%, 24 weeks). Most of the serious adverse events were related to ribavirin. The mean daily dose of ribavirin in the patients with decompensated cirrhosis was 600 mg. Therapy was discontinued in 7% of the CTP class B patients and 8% of the CTP class C patients in the 24-week treatment arm. The multicenter (Europe, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand), randomized, open-label, phase 2 SOLAR-2 study included 160 patients with genotype 1 or 4 and decompensated cirrhosis (CTP class B or C). Study participants, who were treatment-naive or -experienced, were randomly assigned to 12 weeks or 24 weeks of daily fixed-dose ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) plus ribavirin (initial dose of 600 mg, increased as tolerated). All participants had a hemoglobin HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 4 of 6 Patients With Decompensated Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) level >10 g/dL and an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) >40 mL/min (Manns, 2016). Among the 150 patients with decompensated cirrhosis who completed therapy and had evaluable efficacy results, SVR12 was achieved in 85% (61/72) of those in the 12-week arm (90% [43/48] CTP class B; 75% [18/24] CTP class C). SVR 12 was achieved by 90% (70/78) of patients with decompensated cirrhosis in the 24-week study arm (98% [47/48] CTP class B; 77% [23/30] CTP class C). Post-therapy virologic relapse occurred in 6% (9/150) of the patients with decompensated cirrhosis who completed therapy (7 in 12-week arm; 2 in 24-week arm). Baseline CTP and MELD scores improved in the majority of the treated patients, but some participants experienced worsening hepatic function. Among nontransplanted patients whose MELD score was ≥15 at baseline, 80% (20/25) had a MELD score <15 at SVR12. Among those with a MELD score <15 at baseline, 4% (2/56) had a MELD score ≥15 at SVR12. During the study, 8% (13/160) of the enrolled patients with decompensated cirrhosis (2 CTP class B, 11 CTP class C) died from various causes but none of the deaths were attributed to antiviral therapy. Serious adverse events occurred in approximately 28% of patients with decompensated cirrhosis with no significant difference between the 12- and 24-week treatment arms. A multicenter, double-blind study from France reported on the use of daily ledipasvir/sofosbuvir for 24 weeks compared to daily ledipasvir/sofosbuvir plus ribavirin for 12 weeks (with a 12-week placebo phase). Study participants included 154 patients with compensated cirrhosis and genotype 1 in whom prior peginterferon/ribavirin treatment failed (for most patients, treatment with peginterferon/ribavirin plus a protease inhibitor also failed) (Bourliere, 2015). The mean MELD score was 7 (range 6–16), 26% of patients had varices, and 13% had a low serum albumin level. The SVR12 rates were 96% with the 12-week regimen and 97% with the 24-week regimen. The most common adverse events were asthenia, headache, and pruritus. The frequency of severe adverse events and the need for early drug discontinuation were low in both treatment groups. In light of these results, it is reasonable to consider daily ledipasvir/sofosbuvir plus ribavirin for 12 weeks in patients with decompensated cirrhosis. Collectively, the results from these trials indicate that a 12-week course of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir and ribavirin (initial dose of 600 mg, increased as tolerated) is an appropriate regimen for patients with decompensated cirrhosis and genotype 1 or 4. Such therapy may lead to objective improvements in hepatic function and reduce the likelihood of recurrent HCV infection after subsequent transplantation. Most patients received a ribavirin dose of 600 mg/d. Of 17 patients (16 genotype 1; 1 genotype 4) in the SOLAR-1 and SOLAR-2 trials (6 CPT class B; 11 CPT class C) who received ledipasvir/sofosbuvir plus ribavirin for 12 weeks or 24 weeks prior to or up to the time of liver transplantation, all had HCV RNA <15 IU/mL at the time of transplantation. Sixteen of the 17 patients achieved posttransplant SVR12; 1 patient died at postoperative day 15, but the HCV RNA was <15 IU/mL on day 14 (Yoshida, 2017). Real-world cohort studies have reported SVR rates in patients with decompensated cirrhosis. Investigators from the United Kingdom reported on the use of 12 weeks of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) or daclatasvir (60 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg), with or without ribavirin, among 235 genotype 1 patients (Foster, 2016). SVR rates were similar in the participants receiving ledipasvir/sofosbuvir plus ribavirin or ledipasvir/sofosbuvir (86% and 81%, respectively). In this observational cohort study, 91% of the patients received ribavirin; only 6% discontinued ribavirin while 20% required a ribavirin dose reduction. MELD scores improved in 42% of treated patients and worsened in 11%. There were 14 deaths and 26% of the patients had a serious adverse event; none were treatment related. The multicenter, prospective, observational HCV-TARGET study examined the real-world efficacy of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir (with or without ribavirin) for various treatment durations. SVR12 among genotype 1 patients with a history of clinically decompensated cirrhosis was 90% (263/293) among evaluable patients (Terrault, 2016). In this cohort, 29% of patients with decompensated cirrhosis were treated with ribavirin and 48% received 24 weeks of treatment. A phase 2a, open-label study of 14 patients with compensated cirrhosis and genotype 1 in whom prior sofosbuvir-based therapy failed demonstrated that ledipasvir/sofosbuvir for 12 weeks was associated with a 100% SVR rate (Osinusi, 2014 ). In addition, results of an open-label, phase 2 study of 51 genotype 1 patients in whom prior sofosbuvir-based therapy failed demonstrated that a 12-week course of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir plus weight-based ribavirin (1000 mg/d to 1200 mg/d) led to an overall SVR12 of 98%, including 100% (14/14) among those patients with compensated cirrhosis (Wyles, 2015b ). Mixed Genotypes HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 5 of 6 Patients With Decompensated Cirrhosis Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Rarely, genotyping assays may indicate the presence of a mixed infection (eg, genotypes 1a and 2). Treatment data for mixed genotypes with DAAs are sparse but utilization of a pangenotypic regimen should be considered. When the correct drug combination or treatment duration is unclear, expert consultation should be sought. Regimens not recommended for: Patients With Decompensated Cirrhosis (Moderate or Severe Hepatic Impairment; Child-Turcotte-Pugh Class B or C) NOT RECOMMENDED RATING Any protease inhibitor-containing regimen (eg, glecaprevir, grazoprevir, and voxilaprevir). III, B Interferon-based regimens III, B Protease-Inhibitor Containing Regimens The daily fixed dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg) administered as three 100 mg/40 mg fixed- dose combination pills has not been studied in patients with decompensated cirrhosis and, pending additional safety data, is not recommended. In a retrospective analysis in a limited number of patients with portal hypertension, glecaprevir/pibrentasvir therapy for 8 or 12 weeks was equally efficacious in patients with and without features of portal hypertension. The therapy  showed similar safety and tolerability features in both patient groups (Brown, 2022). To date, the fixed-dose combination of elbasvir (50 mg)/grazoprevir (100 mg) has not been rigorously studied in patients with decompensated cirrhosis. A phase 2, nonrandomized, open-label study of elbasvir/grazoprevir (50 mg/50 mg) for 12 weeks was completed in 30 genotype 1 patients with CTP class B cirrhosis (Jacobson, 2019). SVR12 was 90% (27/30); 1 patient died of liver failure at posttreatment week 4 and 2 patients relapsed. At follow-up week 12, MELD scores improved in 41% (12/29) of treated patients, were unchanged in 38% (11/29), and worsened in 21% (6/29). However, there are no safety or efficacy data regarding the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved elbasvir/grazoprevir doses in patients with decompensated cirrhosis. Therefore, until further data are available, treatment of patients with decompensated cirrhosis with elbasvir/grazoprevir is not recommended. Similarly, the daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/voxilaprevir (100 mg) has not been extensively studied in patients with hepatic decompensation. Thus, this regimen is not recommended for patients with decompensated cirrhosis (CTP class B or C) until further data are available. A recent real-world study conducted in a small number of patients with genotype 3 HCV infection and liver cirrhosis showed that the sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir triple therapy was highly efficacious. However, poor tolerability was seen in patients with advanced liver disease (Papaluca, 2021). Similarly, a recent single-center retrospective case review study found this triple therapy to be highly efficacious, in patients with decompensated cirrhosis, when administered under careful observation to patients with a high likelihood of achieving SVR (Patel, 2021). Interferon-Based Regimens Interferon should not be given to patients with decompensated cirrhosis (moderate or severe hepatic impairment, CTP class B or C) because of the potential for worsening hepatic decompensation. Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 6 of 6 Patients Who Develop Recurrent HCV Infection Post Liver Transplanta Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Patients Who Develop Recurrent HCV Infection Post Liver Transplantation Post Liver Transplantation: Genotype 1-6 Recommended regimens listed by pangenotypic activity, evidence level and alphabetically for: Treatment-Naive and -Experienced Patients With Genotype 1-6 Infection in the Allograft Without Cirrhosis RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg)a 12 weeks I, B Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) 12 weeks I, B Genotype 1, 4, 5, or 6 only: Daily fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) 12 weeks I, B a Dosing is 3 coformulated tablets (glecaprevir [100 mg]/pibrentasvir [40 mg]) taken once daily. Please refer to the prescribing information. Recommended regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for: Treatment-Naive and -Experienced Patients With Genotype 1-6 Infection in the Allograft With Compensated Cirrhosis RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) 12 weeks I, B Daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg)a 12 weeks I, C Genotype 1, 4, 5, or 6 only: Daily fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) 12 weeks I, A a Dosing is 3 coformulated tablets (glecaprevir [100 mg]/pibrentasvir [40 mg]) taken once daily. Please refer to the prescribing information. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 6 Patients Who Develop Recurrent HCV Infection Post Liver Transplanta Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommended regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for: Treatment-Naive and -Experienced Patients With Genotype 1-6 Infection in the Allograft and Decompensated Cirrhosisa RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/ ribavirin starting at 600 mg and increased as toleratedb 12 to 24 weeksc I, B Genotype 1, 4, 5, or 6 only: Daily fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) with low initial dose of ribavirin (600 mg, increase as tolerated)b 12 to 24 weeksc I, B a Includes CTP class B and class C patients. b The starting dose of ribavirin should be 600 mg/d and increased or decreased as tolerated. If renal dysfunction is present, a lower starting dose is recommended. Maximum ribavirin dose is 1000 mg/d if <75 kg and 1200 mg/d if ≥75 kg body weight. c 24-week treatment duration is recommended if treatment experienced. Recommended regimen for: DAA-Experienced Patients With Genotype 1-6 Infection in the Allograft, With or Without Compensated Cirrhosisa RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/voxilaprevir (100 mg)b 12 weeks I, C a Excludes CTP class B and class C patients. b For patients with cirrhosis plus multiple negative baseline characteristic, consideration should be given to adding ribavirin. The starting dose of ribavirin should be 600 mg/d and increased or decreased as tolerated. If renal dysfunction is present, a lower starting dose is recommended. Maximum ribavirin dose is 1000 mg/d if <75 kg and 1200 mg/d if ≥75 kg body weight. Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir The MAGELLAN-2 trial was an open-label, multicenter, single-arm, phase 3 study that evaluated a 12-week course of the daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg) administered as three 100 mg/40 mg fixed- dose combination pills in 80 liver transplant recipients and 20 kidney transplant recipients without cirrhosis. All genotypes were represented except genotype 5; 57% of participants had genotype 1 and 24% had genotype 3. Except for genotype 3 patients (all of whom were treatment naive), treatment-experienced patients were included (interferon or peginterferon ± ribavirin, or sofosbuvir plus ribavirin ± peginterferon). Eighty percent of patients had Metavir stage F0 or F1 fibrosis, 6% had F2, and 14% had F3. Cirrhotic patients were excluded. Any stable immunosuppressive regimen was allowed, except cyclosporine >100 mg/d and prednisone >10 mg/d. SVR was achieved in 98% (98/100) of patients with no virologic breakthroughs on treatment and 1 post-treatment relapse (Reau, 2018). There were no treatment discontinuations due to drug-associated adverse effects. One episode of mild rejection occurred that was assessed to be unrelated to drug interactions. A multicenter study from Japan treated 24 liver transplant recipients with recurrent HCV with 8 weeks or 12 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 6 Patients Who Develop Recurrent HCV Infection Post Liver Transplanta Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir (including 21% with F3/F4); 96% achieved SVR12. All 13 patients (genotype 1 or 2, without cirrhosis) treated for 8 weeks achieved SVR (Ueda, 2019). As data on the efficacy of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in transplant recipients with cirrhosis and use of shorter treatment course (8 weeks versus 12 weeks) in those without cirrhosis are very limited, pending additional real-world data, a 12-week course is recommended regardless of stage. Additionally, for patients with cirrhosis plus other negative baseline factors, adding low-dose (600 mg) ribavirin may be a consideration. Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir The safety and efficacy of the fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) for 12 weeks was evaluated in 79 (5 with cirrhosis, 4 DAA experienced) liver transplant recipients with genotype 1, 2, 3, or 4 (Agarwal, 2018 ). Treatment was well tolerated with 99% of patients completing treatment. Overall SVR12 rates by genotype were 93% genotype 1a (n=15); 96% genotype 1b (n=22); 100% genotype 2 (n=3); 97% genotype 3 (n=35); and 100% genotype 4 (n=4). Eighteen (23%) patients required a change in immunosuppression during treatment but none were for rejection or drug-drug-interactions. Most patients were on calcineurin inhibitor-based immunosuppression (71% on tacrolimus, 14% on cyclosporine). In the nontransplant setting (discussed in detail in the Initial and Retreatment sections), the phase 3, double-blind, placebo-controlled ASTRAL-1 study reported on 742 treatment-naive or -experienced patients with genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 who were randomly assigned in a 5:1 ratio to sofosbuvir/velpatasvir or placebo for 12 weeks (Feld, 2015). All patients with genotype 5 (n=35) received active treatment. Thirty-two percent (201/624) of patients randomized to active therapy were treatment experienced and 19% (121/624) had compensated cirrhosis (CTP class A). The genotype distribution in the active treatment arm was 34% (n=210) genotype 1a; 19% (n=118) genotype 1b; 17% (n=104) genotype 2; 19% (n=116) genotype 4; 6% (n=35) genotype 5; and 7% (n=41) genotype 6. The overall SVR was 99% (95% CI, 98 to >99). The side effect/adverse event profile of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir was similar to placebo. In the phase 3, open-label ASTRAL-3 study, 552 treatment-naive or -experienced patients with genotype 3 (with or without compensated cirrhosis) were randomized in a 1:1 ratio to 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir or 24 weeks of sofosbuvir plus weight-based ribavirin. SVR12 was 95% (95% CI, 92 to 98) for the sofosbuvir/velpatasvir treatment arm, which was superior to the SVR12 of 80% (95% CI, 75 to 85) for patients receiving sofosbuvir plus ribavirin for 24 weeks (Foster, 2015a). The phase 3, open-label ASTRAL-4 study enrolled 267 treatment-naive or -experienced (55%) patients with genotype 1, 2, 3, 4, or 6 and decompensated cirrhosis (CTP class B at the time of screening). Patients were randomized in a 1:1:1 ratio to 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir, 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir plus weight-based ribavirin, or 24 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir. SVR12 rates were 83% (75/90) for the 12-week sofosbuvir/velpatasvir regimen, 94% (82/87) for the 12-week sofosbuvir/velpatasvir plus ribavirin regimen, and 86% (77/90) for the 24-week sofosbuvir/velpatasvir regimen (Curry, 2015b). Among patients with genotype 1, SVR12 rates were 88% and 96% with 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir without and with ribavirin respectively, and 92% with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir for 24 weeks. Virologic relapse occurred in 12% and 9% of patients in the 12-week and 24-week sofosbuvir/velpatasvir arms, respectively, compared to 2% in the 12-week sofosbuvir/velpatasvir plus ribavirin study arm. Although the ASTRAL-4 study was not powered to generate statistical significance, these results suggest that sofosbuvir/velpatasvir with ribavirin for 12 weeks is the optimal choice for patients with genotype 1 or 3 who have decompensated cirrhosis. The participant numbers were too small for genotypes 2, 4, and 6 to differentiate the comparative efficacy of the treatment arms. Reflecting the approach in nontransplant patients with decompensated cirrhosis, liver transplant recipients with hepatic decompensation are recommended to receive sofosbuvir/velpatasvir plus ribavirin for 12 to 24 weeks, depending upon presence of other negative prognostic features at baseline (ie, treatment experienced, genotype 3, presence of hepatocellular carcinoma). Velpatasvir is a substrate for CYP3A4, CYP2C8, and CYP2B6, a weak inhibitor of P-gp and OATP transporters, and a moderate inhibitor of the breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) membrane transporter. As such, velpatasvir is moderately affected by potent inhibitors and, to a greater extent, potent inducers of enzyme/drug transporter systems (Mogalian, 2016). Based on this profile, which is similar to ledipasvir, clinically significant drug-drug interactions would not be expected for coadministration of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir with common immunosuppressive agents (eg, tacrolimus, cyclosporine, corticosteroids, mycophenolate mofetil, or everolimus). HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 6 Patients Who Develop Recurrent HCV Infection Post Liver Transplanta Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Ledipasvir/Sofosbuvir The SOLAR-1 study was a large, US-based, multicenter, open-label, phase 2 trial that included 223 liver transplant recipients with genotype 1 or 4 whose baseline characteristics encompassed a broad spectrum of histologic and clinical severity of HCV recurrence. One hundred and eleven patients were Metavir stage F0 to F3, 51 had compensated CTP class A cirrhosis, and 61 had decompensated CTP class B or class C cirrhosis. Study participants were randomly assigned to 12 weeks or 24 weeks of a fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) plus ribavirin. The ribavirin dose was weight based for patients without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis (1000 mg/d [<75 kg] to 1200 mg/d [≥ 75 kg]). For patients with CTP class B or class C cirrhosis, ribavirin was initiated at 600 mg/d followed by dose escalation as tolerated. Only 4% of enrolled participants discontinued treatment prematurely because of adverse events related to the study drugs (Charlton, 2015b). On an intention-to-treat basis, SVR was achieved in 96% (53/55) and 98% (55/56) of liver transplant patients without cirrhosis in the 12- and 24-week treatment arms, respectively. Among those with compensated cirrhosis, SVR was 96% in both the 12- and 24-week treatment arms. Efficacy was lower in patients with CTP class B or class C cirrhosis post liver transplantation. Among those with CTP class B cirrhosis, SVR rates were 86% and 88% in the 12- and 24-week treatment arms, respectively. Among patients with CTP class C cirrhosis, SVR rates were 60% and 75% in the 12- and 24-week treatment arms, respectively. Mortality rate during the study was 10% among patients with CTP class B or class C cirrhosis (Charlton, 2015b). Similar results were achieved using an identical study design in the SOLAR-2 study, which was conducted in Europe, Australia, Canada, and New Zealand. The study included 168 liver transplant recipients with genotype 1 or 4 infection. Among the post-transplantation patients, 101 had no cirrhosis (Metavir stage F0 to F3), 67 had CTP class A compensated cirrhosis, 45 had CTP class B cirrhosis, and 8 had CTP class C decompensation. SVR rates in post-transplantation, noncirrhotic patients were 94% (49/52) and 100% (49/49) for 12 weeks and 24 weeks of treatment, respectively. Among patients with compensated cirrhosis after transplantation, SVR was 97% (33/34; 32/33) in both the 12- and 24-week treatment arms. For patients with CTP class B cirrhosis, comparable SVR rates were 95% (21/22) and 100% (23/23), respectively. Among those with CTP class C cirrhosis, SVR rates were 33% (1/3) and 80% (4/5), respectively. Considering both pre- and post-transplantation patients with CTP class B or class C cirrhosis, SVR rates were 85% (61/72) and 90% (70/78) for 12 weeks and 24 weeks of treatment, respectively. An observational HCV-TARGET cohort study provides real-world data based on experience with 347 liver, 60 kidney, and 36 dual liver and kidney transplant recipients. Among the enrolled patients, 86% had genotype 1, 44% had cirrhosis, 26% had a history of liver decompensation, and 54% had a prior treatment failure with a non-NS5A inhibitor regimen (Saxena, 2017). Among the 279 participants treated with ledipasvir/sofosbuvir for 12 weeks or 24 weeks, the SVR rates were 97% (152/157) for those also taking ribavirin and 95% (116/122) for patients not taking ribavirin. Patients who received ribavirin were more frequently genotype 1a (versus genotype 1b), treatment experienced, and without renal dysfunction. The rate of therapy discontinuation due to an adverse event was 1.3%, highlighting the safety of the drug combination. Acute graft rejection occurred during or after cessation of therapy in 1.4% (6/415) of patients. These episodes were not judged to be a direct consequence of the antiviral regimen but serve to remind clinicians of the need to monitor immunosuppressive agent levels during direct-acting antiviral (DAA) therapy. Another multicenter cohort of 162 patients (98% genotype 1) assessed treatment with ledipasvir/sofosbuvir (with or without ribavirin) for 8 weeks, 12 weeks, or 24 weeks. Duration of treatment and ribavirin use were provider determined. Overall SVR12 rates were 94% and 98% in those treated with ledipasvir/sofosbuvir without or with ribavirin, respectively (Kwok, 2016). SVR12 rates in patients treated for 8 weeks, 12 weeks, or 24 weeks with the ribavirin-free regimen were 86% (6/7), 94% (65/69), and 95% (39/41), respectively. SVR12 rates in the ribavirin-inclusive groups were 97% (38/39) and 100% (6/6) for 12 weeks and 24 weeks of treatment, respectively. The multicenter ANRS CO23 CUPILT study investigators reported their experience with sofosbuvir plus an NS5A inhibitor (daclatasvir or ledipasvir ± ribavirin) among 512 liver transplant recipients with recurrent HCV who met inclusion criteria for analysis (Houssel-Debry, 2018). The genotype distribution of the participants was 70% (n=359) genotype 1, 1% (n=7) genotype 2, 18% (n=93) genotype 3, 10% (n=50) genotype 4, and <1% (n=3) genotype 5. Twenty-one percent had cirrhosis and 34% had prior treatment experience. The regimens and treatment durations were sofosbuvir plus an NS5A inhibitor without ribavirin for 12 weeks (n=156) or 24 weeks (n=239), and sofosbuvir plus an NS5A inhibitor and ribavirin HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 4 of 6 Patients Who Develop Recurrent HCV Infection Post Liver Transplanta Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) for 12 weeks (n=47) or 24 weeks (n=70). SVR12 rates were 94%, 99%, 96%, and 93%, respectively. Twenty patients experienced treatment failure and in a multivariate analysis, fibrosis stage, prior treatment, genotype, and baseline HCV viral load did not adversely impact SVR12 rates in the 4 treatment groups. The investigators concluded that 12 weeks of sofosbuvir plus an NS5A inhibitor without ribavirin was an effective regimen regardless of fibrosis stage, genotype, and prior treatment experience. Collectively, these real-world experiences indicate high SVR rates can be attained without inclusion of ribavirin in liver transplant patients. However, all factors leading clinicians to include or exclude ribavirin cannot be discerned from these observational studies. The safest presumption is that ribavirin may contribute to the high SVR rates and be relevant for patients with unfavorable baseline characteristics (eg, cirrhosis, prior treatment experience). Thus, ribavirin-free therapy is recommended for patients with a favorable baseline profile and ribavirin-inclusive therapy is recommended for those with an unfavorable baseline profile. Most clinical trials to date have focused on patients who were at least 6 months post transplantation, but there is no a priori reason not to consider earlier treatment if the patient is on stable immunosuppression and has recovered from postoperative complications. Treatment during the first 6 to 12 months post transplantation certainly seems reasonable to reduce the likelihood of treating patients with more advanced liver disease. A phase 2 study of prophylactic ledipasvir/sofosbuvir enrolled 16 genotype 1 liver transplant recipients (most with hepatocellular carcinoma as the indication). Treatment was initiated immediately preoperatively and continued for 4 weeks post transplantation (Levitsky, 2016). SVR12 post transplantation was attained in 88% (15/16) of patients. While these results are too preliminary upon which to base recommendations, the findings provide additional data on the safety of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir early in the post-transplantation period. Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir/Voxilaprevir There is limited experience with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir in liver transplant recipients. In a single case report of a prior DAA regimen failure, successful treatment of recurrent HCV after liver transplant with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir was achieved (Cardona-Gonzalez, 2018). The patient had genotype 3 infection and acute hepatitis post liver transplant. He was treated with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir for 16 weeks with ribavirin added during the last 8 weeks of therapy. In a subsequent case series, 6 liver transplant recipients with HCV genotype 1 ± genotype 4 infection who had a previous DAA treatment failure were treated with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir. Participants received a 12-week course of therapy and all achieved SVR. Minor reductions in calcineurin inhibitor dosing were required but no adverse events or rejection episodes were reported (Higley, 2020). Mixed Genotypes Rarely, genotyping assays may indicate the presence of a mixed infection (eg, genotypes 1a and 2). Treatment data for mixed genotypes with DAAs are sparse but utilization of a pangenotypic regimen should be considered. When the correct combination or treatment duration is unclear, expert consultation should be sought. Drug-Drug Interactions Between DAAs and Calcineurin Inhibitors The interactions of DAA agents and calcineurin inhibitors are complex and unpredictable without formal studies of drug- drug interactions. A summary of drug-drug interactions between calcineurin inhibitors and DAAs with recommended dosing is provided in the table below. Based on the metabolism of grazoprevir and elbasvir, a 15-fold increase in grazoprevir AUC and a 2-fold increase in elbasvir AUC can be expected with cyclosporine coadministration. Therefore, this combination should be avoided. Since a 40% to 50% increase in tacrolimus level is predicted during coadministration with grazoprevir, no dosing adjustments are anticipated but tacrolimus levels should be monitored. Table. DAA Interactions With Calcineurin Inhibitors HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 5 of 6 Patients Who Develop Recurrent HCV Infection Post Liver Transplanta Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Cyclosporine (CSA) Tacrolimus (TAC) Sofosbuvir (SOF) 4.5-fold ? in SOF AUC, but GS-331007 metabolite unchanged; no a priori dose adjustment No interaction observed; no a priori dose adjustment Ledipasvir No data; no a priori dose adjustment No data; no a priori dose adjustment Elbasvir / grazoprevir (EBR/GZR) 15-fold ? in GZR AUC and 2-fold ? in EBR AUC; combination is not recommended 43% ? in TAC; no a priori dose adjustment Velpatasvir No interaction observed; no a priori dose adjustment No data; no a priori dose adjustment Glecaprevir / pibrentasvir (GLE/PIB) 5-fold ? in GLE AUC with higher doses (400 mg) of CSA; not recommended in patients requiring stable CSA doses >100 mg/day 1.45-fold ? in TAC AUC; no a priori dose adjustment; monitor TAC levels and titrate TAC dose as needed Sofosbuvir / velpatasvir / voxila previr (SOF/VEL/VOX) 9.4-fold ? in VOX AUC; combination is not recommended No data; no a priori dose adjustment AUC=area under the curve Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 6 of 6 Treatment of HCV-Uninfected Transplant Recipients Receiving Organs Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Treatment of HCV-Uninfected Transplant Recipients Receiving Organs From HCV-Viremic Donors With the large disparity between patients in need of organ transplantation and available donor organs, many transplant programs are turning to the use of organs from HCV-viremic donors. In the past, organs from HCV-viremic donors were primarily used in recipients with chronic hepatitis C or discarded. With the advent of safe and effective HCV DAA regimens, however, organs from HCV-viremic donors may be considered for use in recipients without HCV infection. Use of these organs increases the pool of available organs, patient access to transplantation (Sageshima, 2018), and potentially reduces waitlist time (Bhamidimarri, 2017); (Scalea, 2015) and related mortality (Sawinski, 2019); (Shelton, 2018); (Kucirka, 2012); (Altshuler, 2022). All organ donors undergo HCV-antibody and HCV nucleic acid testing (NAT). Nonhepatic donors who are HCV antibody positive but HCV RNA negative likely pose a negligible risk of HCV transmission to the recipient, although more data are needed to confirm this. However, among increased-risk donors (as defined by the US Public Health Service [PHS] guidelines) who had a recent HCV exposure, HCV RNA may not yet be detectable and transplant recipients from these donors should be monitored for HCV in addition to HBV and HIV per the increased-risk donor testing protocols (Levitsky, 2017); (Seem, 2013b). Transplant recipients who receive a liver from an HCV-antibody–positive/HCV-RNA–negative donor should be monitored more closely after transplantation given the potential risk for HCV transmission (Bari, 2018); (Sobotka, 2021). Donors who are HCV RNA positive (with or without anti-HCV) pose the highest risk for HCV transmission to transplant recipients. Because of the significant risk for HCV infection when transplanting an organ from an HCV- viremic donor into an HCV-uninfected recipient, rigorous informed consent, including discussion of potential secondary risks to caregivers from needlestick exposures (Kim, 2022), and post-transplantation, HCV-related follow-up processes are recommended. Recommendations When Considering Use of HCV-Viremic Donor Organs in HCV-Uninfected Recipients RECOMMENDED RATING Informed consent should include the following elements: Risk of transmission from an HCV-viremic donor Risk of liver disease if HCV treatment is not available or treatment is unsuccessful Risk of graft failure Risk of extrahepatic complications, such as HCV-associated renal disease Risk of HCV transmission to partner Benefits, specifically reduced waiting time and possibly lower waiting list mortality Other unknown long-term consequences (hepatic and extrahepatic) of HCV exposure (even if cure is attained) I, C Transplant programs should have a programmatic strategy to: Document informed consent Assure access to HCV treatment and retreatment(s), as necessary Ensure long-term follow-up of recipients (beyond SVR12) I, C HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 7 Treatment of HCV-Uninfected Transplant Recipients Receiving Organs Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommendations When Considering Use of HCV-Viremic Donor Organs in HCV-Uninfected Recipients Recent data indicate increasing acceptance of organs from HCV-viremic donors among HCV-uninfected recipients (Cotter, 2019); (Potluri, 2019); (Bowring, 2018). Although no published data are available regarding the long-term (beyond 1 to 2 years) consequences to HCV-negative recipients transplanted with organs from HCV-viremic donors who are treated post-transplant with DAAs, limited short-term data from liver, kidney, heart, and lung transplant programs are encouraging. Liver Transplantation Among 10 HCV-negative liver transplant recipients of organs from HCV-viremic donors, 100% achieved SVR12 with 12 to 24 weeks of various DAA regimens (Kwong, 2019). The median time from transplantation to treatment initiation was 43 days (interquartile range [IQR] 20-59 days). Noteworthy was the high rate of acute cellular or antibody-mediated rejection (30%) during or after DAA therapy in this study. In another study of 14 HCV-negative liver transplant recipients from HCV- viremic donors, treated with glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for 12 weeks starting within 5 days of transplant, SVR rates were 100% and only one patient experienced acute rejection (Bethea, 2020). In another single center experience, 61 HCV- negative recipients of liver allografts from HCV-viremic donors were compared to 231 HCV-negative recipients of liver allografts from HCV-negative donors (Bohorquez, 2021a). Of the 61 patients in the study group, 56 received antiviral therapy; treatment was initiated a median of 66.9 days following transplantation. Four study group participants died (within 1 year following liver transplantation), one was persistently aviremic, and another experienced a complex post-operative course). Of the 51 patients with complete treatment data, 64% were treated with glecaprevir/pibrentasvir and 36% received sofosbuvir/velpatasvir. All patients achieved SVR12; one participant required retreatment with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir after relapse. There were no significant differences between recipients of allografts from HCV-viremic vs HCV-negative donors in terms of other clinical outcomes such as acute cellular rejection, kidney dysfunction, or survival. A retrospective study of deceased donor liver transplantations in the US from January 2008 through January 2018 demonstrated that 2-year graft survival was similar, regardless of HCV status concordance or discordance between the allograft donor and recipient (Cotter, 2019). In a single-center retrospective study of 21 HCV- seronegative recipients who received a liver transplant from HCV-viremic donors, 20 (95%) of recipients had confirmed HCV viremia and 100% of the 15 patients with available data achieved SVR12 after DAA treatment. There were equivalent rates of post-transplant complications between the 21 recipients who received a liver from HCV-viremic donors when compared to 21 recipients who received a liver from HCV antibody positive / NAT negative donors (Sobotka, 2021). In a prospective, multicenter (n=6), single-arm, open-label clinical trial, 13 HCV-negative liver transplant recipients received allografts from HCV-viremic donors. Participants were treated with 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir; the median time from transplantation to antiviral therapy was 7 days (Terrault, 2020). All liver transplant recipients achieved SVR12. Serious adverse events possibly related to study participation among the liver recipients included antibody mediated rejection, biliary sclerosis, cardiomyopathy, and graft-versus-host disease (which eventually led to the patient’s death). In a prospective multicenter (n=3) observational study, 20 HCV-negative patients received a liver transplant from HCV-viremic donors and all recipients had HCV viremia confirmed within 3 days post-transplant and achieved SVR12 after receiving DAA treatment (median 27.5 days post-transplant) (Aqel, 2021). One patient who was started on DAA treatment on post-op day 24 developed end-stage renal disease secondary to HCV-related acute membranous nephropathy and died 14 months post-transplant due to septic shock from a presumed infection. Unlike with other organs, shorter durations of HCV therapy should not be used in recipients of livers from HCV-viremic donors because of the large reservoir of HCV in the transplanted organ. Additionally, although prophylactic or pre-emptive therapy has not been as strongly stressed for recipients of liver grafts from HCV-viremic donors, a case report noted the development of acute kidney injury (with proteinuria) in the first month posttransplant due to HCV-associated focal proliferative glomerulonephritis. This case report highlights the potential for HCV-related, extrahepatic manifestations in the early posttransplant setting (Bohorquez, 2021b). The prospective multicenter noted above (Aqel, 2021) also highlights the importance of considering the initiation of DAA treatment earlier post-transplant given that one liver transplant recipient had biopsy-proven acute HCV-related glomerulonephritis on post-op day 18, which was 6 days prior to the initiation of HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 7 Treatment of HCV-Uninfected Transplant Recipients Receiving Organs Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) DAA treatment, and went on to develop end stage renal disease despite having achieved SVR12. This patient died due to presumed infectious complications. The possible high risk for immunologic complications (eg, rejection) in liver recipients from HCV-viremic donors treated with DAA therapy requires further study but vigilance is appropriate. Recommendation Regarding Timing of DAA Therapy for HCV-Negative Recipients of HCV-Viremic Liver Transplant RECOMMENDED RATING Earlya treatment with a pangenotypic DAA regimen is recommended when the patient is clinically stable. II, B a Early treatment refers to starting within the first 2 weeks after liver transplant but preferably within the first week when the patient is clinically stable. Recommended regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for: Treatment of HCV-Uninfected Recipients of Liver Grafts from HCV-Viremic Donors RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg)b 12 weeks I, C Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) 12 weeks I, C a Other considerations in selection of the DAA regimen: Presence of liver dysfunction (eg, elevated bilirubin) as protease inhibitors should be avoided Specific drugs that are contraindicated or not recommended with specific DAA agents, including but not limited to: High-dose antacid therapy (eg, twice daily proton pump inhibitor) Amiodarone (contraindicated with sofosbuvir-inclusive regimens; see prescribing information) Specific statins (eg, atorvastatin) Consideration of immunosuppressive drugs and DAA interactions (see below) b Dosing is 3 coformulated tablets (glecaprevir [100 mg]/pibrentasvir [40 mg]) taken once daily. Please refer to the prescribing information. Transplantation of Other Organs In the THINKER trial, 10 HCV-uninfected kidney transplant recipients received allografts from genotype 1 HCV-viremic donors and were treated with 12 weeks of elbasvir/grazoprevir; 100% achieved SVR (Goldberg, 2017). In a 1-year follow- HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 7 Treatment of HCV-Uninfected Transplant Recipients Receiving Organs Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) up study that included 10 additional participants (n=20) who received 12 to 16 weeks of elbasvir/grazoprevir (± ribavirin), all achieved SVR12. Kidney function in those who received kidneys from HCV-infected donors was comparable to matched controls who received allografts from HCV-uninfected donors (Reese, 2018). A separate open-label trial similarly demonstrated 100% SVR12 with 12 weeks of elbasvir/grazoprevir (± sofosbuvir) therapy initiated immediately prior to transplantation in 10 HCV-uninfected kidney transplant recipients of allografts from HCV-viremic donors (Durand, 2018). Notably, organ recipients in this study received the first dose of elbasvir/grazoprevir on call to the operating room. Of the 10 patients treated, only 3 had detectable HCV viremia compared to 100% in the THINKER trial, which utilized the same regimen but initiated therapy on day 3 after transplantation. In a prospective, multicenter (n=7) study to transplant hepatitis C-infected kidneys (ie, the MYTHIC trial), 30 HCV- negative recipients received kidney allografts from HCV-viremic donors. Early initiation of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir (target was within 3 days posttransplant) for 8 weeks resulted in 100% SVR12; there were no significant treatment-related adverse events (Sise, 2020). Three episodes of acute rejection were noted but all patients had good graft function at 6 months follow-up. Three patients developed transient BK viremia and 4 (40%) of the 10 recipients who were CMV donor seropositive, CMV recipient seronegative developed CMV disease within the first-year post-transplant. One-year survival was 93% and 1-year graft function was excellent (median creatinine 1.17; IQR: 1.02-1.38 mg/dl) (Sise, 2021). A prospective, multicenter, single-arm, open-label clinical trial evaluated the safety and efficacy 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir among 11 HCV-negative kidney transplant recipients who received grafts from HCV-viremic donors (Terrault, 2020). The median time from transplant to initiation of DAA therapy was 16.5 days; all kidney transplant recipients in this study achieved SVR12. No serious adverse events related to study participation were noted in the kidney recipients in this study. The REHANNA trial evaluated a shortened 4-week course of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir treated (compared to the standard 8 weeks) among HCV-negative kidney transplant recipients who received grafts from HCV- viremic donors. The first dose was administered prior to organ perfusion. All 10 patients achieved SVR12 and there were no adverse outcomes noted (Durand, 2021). Other studies in HCV discordant kidney donors and transplant recipients have also demonstrated high SVR12 rates without any treatment-related toxicities (Franco, 2019); (Friebus-Kardash, 2019). A single-center, retrospective cohort study compared 1-year outcomes for 65 transplant recipients who received a kidney from HCV viremic donors to 59 recipients who received a kidney from HCV negative donors (Molnar, 2021). Allograft biopsy findings and kidney allograft function during the first-year post-kidney transplantation were assessed and there were no statistically significant differences between the HCV positive and HCV negative cohorts with regards to delayed graft function rates, estimated glomerular filtration rates (eGFR), and proportions of patients with cellular rejection, antibody mediated rejection, or de novo DSAs. A study of HCV-uninfected recipients who received a heart transplant from an HCV-viremic donor showed that using a 12-week course of elbasvir/grazoprevir initiated a few days after transplantation (once the recipient became viremic) resulted in SVR12 in 9 out of the 10 evaluable patients (McLean, 2019). In the DONATE HCV trial, 44 HCV-uninfected lung (n=36) and heart transplant (n=8) recipients from HCV-viremic donors sofosbuvir/velpatasvir was administered prophylactically or preemptively, starting within a few hours after transplantation and continued for 4 weeks (compared to the standard 12-week course). Among the initial 35 patients with at least 6 months of follow-up after transplantation, 100% achieved SVR and had excellent graft function (Woolley, 2019). There was an increase in the proportion of the HCV- viremic lung cohort who had acute cellular rejection compared to the non-HCV lung cohort, although this finding was not statistically significant and longer-term follow-up is needed to assess for chronic rejection. In a study of 20 HCV-uninfected heart transplant recipients of allografts from HCV-viremic donors, patients were treated prophylactically or preemptively with glecaprevir/pibrentasvir beginning just prior to transplantation and continued for 8 weeks. All participants achieved SVR12, and patient and graft survival were 100% with a median follow-up of 10.7 months (Bethea, 2019). Another clinical trial evaluated 22 HCV-uninfected lung transplant recipients of allografts from HCV-viremic donors; the 20 patients who became viremic after transplantation were treated with 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir beginning 2 to 6 weeks after transplantation (median 21 days; IQR 16.76-24.75 days). All lungs from HCV-viremic donors were treated with ex-vivo lung perfusion ± ultraviolet C perfusate irradiation to reduce HCV RNA concentration and infectivity, likely contributing to a slower rise in HCV viral load among recipients. Although all 20 DAA-treated patients had undetectable HCV RNA at the end of treatment, 2 patients experienced post-treatment relapse. One patient experienced severe hepatitis with early signs HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 4 of 7 Treatment of HCV-Uninfected Transplant Recipients Receiving Organs Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) of fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis [FCH] on liver biopsy, and both patients exhibited complex NS3A and NS5A RASs at relapse. Both relapsed patients were successfully retreated with 24 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir plus ribavirin and achieved SVR12 (Cypel, 2019). A study of 22 heart transplants from HCV-viremic donors evaluated an 8-week course of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir initiated 6–11 days after transplantation, once the viremia developed. Two patients had DAA interruptions. No differences were noted between the HCV-viremic vs HCV-aviremic donor cohorts in terms of survival or rejection (Reyentovich, 2020 ). Another study evaluated 38 thoracic organ transplants (22 heart; 16 lung) from HCV-viremic donors. Treatment with glecaprevir/pibrentasvir was initiated at the time of detectable viremia (mean 7 days) among the heart recipients and within 3 days after transplantation for the lung recipients; all participants achieved SVR12 (Smith, 2021). DAA treatment interruption occurred in 2 patients due to hyperbilirubinemia. One patient resumed treatment within a few days; the other patient’s treatment course was shortened to 10 days. Both patients still achieved SVR12. In the heart transplant recipients, all patients became viremic within the first week after transplantation. In contrast, only 11 of the 16 lung transplant recipients developed viremia. Overall, investigators noted reduced HCV transmission, lower viral loads, and more rapid clearance in the lung transplant patients who received earlier treatment (Smith, 2021). In both of these studies, initiation of treatment within a few days after transplantation was associated with an occasional need for treatment interruption, although all recipients still achieved SVR12 (Reyentovich, 2020); (Smith, 2021). A separate study conducted among 50 heart transplant recipients (22 received hearts from HCV-viremic donors), an 8-week course of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir was initiated once viremia developed (mean 7.2 days) (Gidea, 2020). Investigators noted a higher proportion of acute cellular rejection in the HCV-viremic vs HCV-aviremic donor study groups (14/22 vs 5/28, respectively; p=0.001) in the first 2 months and at 180 days (17/22 vs 12/28, respectively; p=0.02). These findings raise concern about a potential association between HCV-viremic donors and rejection. While these early results are encouraging, the overall number of published cases is small and treatment approaches notably variable. Known reported risks include DAA treatment failure with emergence of complex RASs and possible severe or rapidly progressive liver disease (fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis) (Cypel, 2019); (Kapila, 2019); (Molnar, 2019). Additionally, ethical and scientific issues remain, including avoidance of selection bias, optimal timing of DAA therapy, and long-term graft and patient outcomes. Due to the limited and heterogeneous experience and lack of longer-term safety data, strong consideration should be given to performing these transplantations with a rigorous informed consent process as recommended by the American Society of Transplantation consensus panel (Levitsky, 2017). In addition, there have been an increasing number of dual organ transplants performed from HCV-viremic donors for heart- kidney recipients nationally between August 2015 and August 2020. Analyses from the UNOS registry demonstrated similar 1-year survival between 90 HCV donor seropositive and 896 HCV donor seronegative heart-kidney recipients using unadjusted and adjusted Cox-proportional hazards-regression models including in propensity-score matched cohorts (Madan, 2021); (Diaz-Castrillon, 2022). Recommendation Regarding Timing of DAA Therapy for HCV-Negative Recipients of HCV-Viremic Non-Liver Solid Organ Transplant RECOMMENDED RATING Prophylactica or preemptiveb treatment with a pangenotypic DAA regimen is recommended. II, B a Initiate DAA therapy immediately pretransplant or on day 0 posttransplant. No HCV RNA testing of the transplant recipient is required b Initiate DAA therapy on day 0 to day 7 posttransplant, as soon as the patient is clinically stable. Demonstration of HCV viremia in the transplant recipient is not required HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 5 of 7 Treatment of HCV-Uninfected Transplant Recipients Receiving Organs Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommendation Regarding Timing of DAA Therapy for HCV-Negative Recipients of HCV-Viremic Non-Liver Solid Organ Transplant Recommended regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for: Treatment of HCV-Uninfected Recipients of Non-Liver Organs from HCV- Viremic Donors RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg)b 8 weeks I, C Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) 12 weeks I, C a Other considerations in selection of the DAA regimen: Presence of liver dysfunction (eg, elevated bilirubin) as protease inhibitors should be avoided Specific drugs that are contraindicated or not recommended with specific DAA agents, including but not limited to: High-dose antacid therapy (eg, twice daily proton pump inhibitor) Amiodarone (contraindicated with sofosbuvir-inclusive regimens; see prescribing information) Specific statins (eg, atorvastatin) Consideration of immunosuppressive drugs and DAA interactions (see below) b 8 weeks is recommended for prophylactic/preemptive treatment approaches. However, if treatment initiation is delayed beyond the first week after transplant, treatment should be continued for 12 weeks. Dosing is 3 coformulated tablets (glecaprevir [100 mg]/pibrentasvir [40 mg]) taken once daily. Please refer to the prescribing information. Initiation of DAA therapy for HCV-negative recipients of a non-liver allograft from an HCV-viremic donor can occur prophylactically/preemptively (ie, perioperatively without confirmation of viremia in the recipient) or reactively after documentation of HCV viremia. The goal is to undertake DAA therapy as early as clinically possible to minimize the duration of HCV viremia in the recipient and avoid the development of acute hepatitis and other non-hepatic complications of HCV infection. Initiating prophylactic/preemptive DAA therapy before viremia occurs may reduce the likelihood of complications, such as FCH, acute HCV-related glomerulonephritis, acute pancreatitis, acute cellular rejection, and allograft vasculopathy (Gidea, 2020); (Schlendorf, 2020); (Bethea, 2019); (Cypel, 2019); (Kapila, 2019); (Woolley, 2019); (Molnar, 2019); (Durand, 2018). A prophylactic/preemptive treatment approach may also allow for a shorter duration of DAA therapy in non-liver transplant recipients of organs from HCV-viremic donors (Woolley, 2019). A recent trial evaluated the use glecaprevir/pibrentasvir combined with ezetimibe 10 mg (as an inhibitor of HCV entry) in 30 recipients of nonhepatic organs (lung, heart, kidney) from HCV-viremic donors. The drugs were administered with 1 dose before and for 7 days after transplantation. With this short therapy, none of the 30 individuals developed chronic HCV infection. It is unknown if infection occurred and was rapidly cleared or if it was prevented entirely (Feld, 2020). Although intriguing, short duration approaches are not currently recommended outside of a clinical trial setting and have only been studied in the context of non-liver transplantation. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 6 of 7 Treatment of HCV-Uninfected Transplant Recipients Receiving Organs Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Though initiating HCV treatment as early as possible post-transplant may be clinically beneficial, barriers to initiating DAA treatment prophylactically/preemptively include the cost of DAA treatment and protracted insurance authorizations. One study compared the clinical and financial impact between an institution-subsidized course of initial DAA treatment with an insurance approval process for DAA coverage once HCV viremia was documented in the recipient. The timing of DAA initiation, duration of recipient viremia, and associated costs incurred by the patient and the institution were assessed in 89 abdominal organ transplant recipients who did not have their DAA treatment subsidized compared to 62 thoracic organ transplant recipients who received DAA treatment that was initially subsidized by the institution. Their analysis showed that by not waiting to initiate DAA treatment for insurance authorization after HCV viremia was documented in the recipient enabled earlier treatment initiation (median, 4 days [IQR, 2-7] vs 10 days [IQR, 8-13]; p <0.001) and shorter duration of viremia (median, 16 days [IQR, 12-29] vs 36 [IQR, 30-47]; p <0.001) (Stewart, 2021). Selection of the DAA therapy for HCV-negative recipients of a non-liver allograft(s) from an HCV-viremic donor should follow the same principles as for those who develop recurrent HCV infection post liver transplantation (see Patients Who Develop Recurrent HCV Infection Post Liver Transplantation). Importantly, since genotyping of HCV-viremic donors is not routinely performed, only pangenotypic regimens should be utilized if a prophylactic/preemptive treatment approach is used. If treatment is delayed until the recipient has quantifiable HCV RNA, the recipient’s genotype can be used to guide DAA treatment selection if a pangenotypic regimen is not used. Selection of regimens that avoid the use of ribavirin (to reduce ribavirin-associated side effects) and regimens that do not require baseline RAS testing are preferred. Thus, although there are data supporting the safety and efficacy of elbasvir/grazoprevir among HCV-negative kidney and heart transplant recipients of allografts from HCV-viremic donors, the regimen is designated an alternative regimen due to the necessity for baseline RAS testing and its limited genotype coverage. Similarly, ledipasvir/sofosbuvir is designated as an alternative regimen due to lack of pangenotypic coverage. Notably, organs from HCV-viremic donors may be used in transplant candidates with current or prior HCV infection (see Patients Who Develop Recurrent HCV Infection Post Liver Transplantation). Drug-Drug Interactions Between DAAs and Calcineurin Inhibitors The interactions of DAA agents and calcineurin inhibitors are complex and unpredictable without formal studies of drug- drug interactions. A summary of interactions between calcineurin inhibitors and DAAs with recommended dosing is provided in the DAA Interactions With Calcineurin Inhibitors table. Based on the metabolism of grazoprevir and elbasvir, a 15-fold increase in grazoprevir AUC and a 2-fold increase in elbasvir AUC can be expected with cyclosporine coadministration. Therefore, this combination should be avoided. Since a 40% to 50% increase in tacrolimus level is predicted with coadministration of grazoprevir, no dosing adjustments are anticipated but tacrolimus levels should be monitored. No clinically significant drug-drug interactions have been observed between sofosbuvir-inclusive regimens and tacrolimus. Last update: December 19, 2023 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 7 of 7 Patients with Renal Impairment Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Patients with Renal Impairment Chronic hepatitis C is independently associated with the development of chronic kidney disease (CKD) (Rogal, 2016); (Fabrizi, 2015). A meta-analysis demonstrated that chronic HCV infection was associated with a 51% increase in the risk of proteinuria and a 43% increase in the incidence of CKD (Fabrizi, 2015). There is also a higher risk of progression to end- stage renal disease (ESRD) in persons with chronic HCV infection and CKD, and an increased risk of all-cause mortality in persons on dialysis (Lee, 2014); (Fabrizi, 2012). Successful HCV antiviral treatment improves clinical outcomes. Antiviral therapy was associated with a survival benefit among persons on dialysis in a nationwide Swedish registry study (Söderholm, 2018). In a retrospective cohort analysis utilizing the Truven Health MarketScan Database (2008-2015), HCV treatment was associated with a 30% decreased risk of developing CKD (HR, 0.70; 95% CI, 0.55-0.88). Persons with HCV infection experienced a twofold and a 17-fold higher risk of membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (HR, 2.23; 95% CI, 1.84-2.71) and cryoglobulinemia (HR, 16.91; 95% CI, 12.00-23.81), compared with persons without HCV (Park, 2018). Among diabetic patients with ESRD receiving care at 4 US health systems, achieving a sustained virologic response (SVR) reduced the risk of developing extrahepatic manifestations of HCV disease, regardless of cirrhosis (sHR=0.46), compared to untreated patients (Li, 2019). In a retrospective observational cohort study, predictors of eGFR improvement after antiviral therapy included baseline CKD (eGFR <60 mL/min) and not having diabetes (Sise, 2019). A prospective cohort study that evaluated estimated glomerular filtration rate in patients with eGFR >15 mL/min demonstrated a lower risk of ESRD in patients who achieve SVR12 (Liu, 2022). Recommendation for Patients With CKD Stagea RECOMMENDED RATING No dose adjustment in direct-acting antivirals is required when using recommended regimens.b I, A or IIa, Bc a Chronic kidney disease (CKD) stages: 1 = normal (eGFR >90 mL/min); 2 = mild CKD (eGFR 60-89 mL/min); 3 = moderate CKD (eGFR 30-59 mL/min); 4 = severe CKD (eGFR 15-29 mL/min); 5 = end-stage CKD (eGFR <15 mL/min) b A ribavirin dose reduction may be required for patients with CKD stage 3, 4, or 5; see prescribing information for details. c The rating is I, A for patients with CKD stage 1, 2, or 3 and IIa, B for those with CKD stage 4 or 5. Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir The EXPEDITION-4 trial evaluated the safety and efficacy of 12 weeks of the pangenotypic NS3/NS4A protease inhibitor glecaprevir and the pangenotypic NS5A inhibitor pibrentasvir for genotype 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 infection (Gane, 2017b). This open-label study enrolled treatment-naive and -experienced patients (previous interferon or peginterferon ± ribavirin, or sofosbuvir and ribavirin ± peginterferon) with CKD stage 4/5, including those with hemodialysis dependence. Baseline characteristics of the 104 patients enrolled in the study were 76% male; 25% black; 19% compensated cirrhosis; 40% treatment experienced; and 82% hemodialysis dependent. The genotype distribution was 22% genotype 1a; 28% genotype 1b; 16% genotype 2; 11% genotype 3; 19% genotype 4; 1% genotype 5; and 1% genotype 6. The daily fixed- dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120mg) was administered as three 100 mg/40 mg fixed-dose HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 4 Patients with Renal Impairment Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) combination pills. The study reported ITT and mITT SVR12 rates of 98% and 100%, respectively. There were no virologic failures. Two patients did not achieve SVR12; 1 patient discontinued the study due to diarrhea in the context of recent gastrointestinal bleeding and the other experienced a cerebral hemorrhage due to uncontrolled hypertension (had achieved SVR4). Adverse events included pruritus (20%), fatigue (14%), and nausea (12%). There were no serious adverse events related to the study drugs, and there were no grade 4 laboratory abnormalities reported. The EXPEDITION-4 trial supports the efficacy and safety of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in patients with CKD, including ESRD. The recommended duration of therapy is the same as for patients without CKD. EXPEDITION-5 evaluated the efficacy and safety of fixed-dose glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for chronic HCV infection in adults without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis and stage 3b, 4, or 5 CKD. Among the 101 study participants, 76% (n=77) were on dialysis and 24% (n=24) had predialysis CKD. Fifty-five percent of patients had genotype 1, 27% had genotype 2, 15% had genotype 3, and 4% had genotype 4; no patients had genotype 5 or 6 infection. Eighty-four patients were treated for 8 weeks, 13 patients for 12 weeks, and 4 patients for 16 weeks. The overall SVR12 was 97% (98/101) with no reported virologic failures (Lawitz, 2020). An integrated analysis of the efficacy and safety of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in persons with genotypes 1 through 6 and CKD stage 3b, 4, or 5 was performed based on the EXPEDITION-4 and EXPEDITION-5 clinical trials. This analysis included 205 patients with compensated liver disease (with and without cirrhosis) and an eGFR <30 mL/min (EXPEDITION-4) or <45 mL/min (EXPEDITION-5). The majority of patients were treatment naive (69%), with genotype 1 (54%), and on dialysis (79%). In this integrated analysis, 100% SVR12 (mITT) was found with glecaprevir/pibrentasvir therapy in patients with chronic hepatitis C and severe renal impairment regardless of treatment duration (Lawitz, 2018). Colchicine‐induced rhabdomyolysis due to interaction with glecaprevir/pibrentasvir has been reported in while receiving treatment of gout. Despite a 50% dose reduction of colchicine before initiation of HCV therapy, the patient experienced rhabdomyolysis. This potential interaction with colchicine has the potential for increased risk for muscle toxicity and should prompt consideration of discontinuation of colchicine during therapy, especially in patients with renal insufficiency (Harrison, 2020). Sofosbuvir-Based Regimens In November 2019, the US FDA amended the package inserts for sofosbuvir-containing regimens to allow use in patients with renal disease, including those with an eGFR ≤30 mL/min and those on dialysis. A retrospective evaluation of clinical trial participants in 76 clinical trials treated with sofosbuvir with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 30-89 mL/min/1.73 m2  in nationally-representative administrative claims database demonstrated that participants with CKD did not experience worsening eGFR during sofosbuvir-based treatment, and sofosbuvir was not associated with an increased risk of ESRD in patients with CKD (Sulkowski, 2022). In a Taiwan real- world HCV registry program of 12,995 persons with a prospective evaluation of serial eGFR levels during and following treatment, sofosbuvir was not associated with eGFR change (Huang, 2022). A prospective multicenter, open-label evaluation of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir (90mg/400mg) daily in patients with HCV with end-stage kidney disease on dialysis demonstrated safety and effectiveness at 8 wks (genotype 1 naïve without cirrhosis), 12 weeks (treatment-experienced genotype 1 treatment-naive or experienced nongenotype 1 without cirrhosis) and 24 weeks (genotypes 1, 2, 4 with compensated cirrhosis). Ninety-four percent (89/95) achieved sustained virologic response 12 weeks after treatment. Six patients died during treatment, however no deaths were related to treatment (Huang, 2022). A real-world case series of treatment-naive and -experienced patients demonstrated that 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir administered in persons with any genotype and on dialysis resulted in 95% (56/59) SVR12. There were no treatment-related discontinuations or serious adverse events. There were 2 virologic relapses; 1 was associated with nonadherence (Borgia, 2019).  A retrospective analysis of 31 treatment-naive patients on hemodialysis demonstrated that 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir administered in persons with any genotype (68% with genotype 1) resulted in a 95% (30/31) SVR12. There was a single virologic relapse among the 3 persons with cirrhosis (Gaur, 2020). A systematic HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 4 Patients with Renal Impairment Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) review and meta-analysis of 717 patients with CKD stage 4/5 (58.4% on dialysis) treated with sofosbuvir regimens across 21 studies demonstrated a pooled SVR 12/24 of 97% and a serious adverse event rate of 4.8%. Cirrhotic and noncirrhotic patients achieved comparable SVR rates (Li, 2019a). Rare adverse advents have been reported among patients with CKD receiving DAAs. Colchicine-induced rhabdomyolysis has been reported in a patient with renal dysfunction being treated with ledipasvir/sofosbuvir while continuing atorvastatin (Patel, 2016). Acute interstitial nephritis following DAA treatment has been described in association with sofosbuvir/ledipasvir (n=5), elbasvir/grazoprevir (n=2), and sofosbuvir/simeprevir (n=1) (Duque, 2021). Elbasvir/Grazoprevir The C-SURFER trial evaluated the safety and efficacy of 12 weeks of the daily fixed-dose combination of elbasvir (50 mg)/grazoprevir (100 mg) versus placebo among genotype 1 patients with CKD stage 4 or 5 (eGFR <30 mL/min). The initial study randomized eligible patients to immediate or deferred treatment with elbasvir/grazoprevir. The delayed treatment arm initially received placebo and was later treated with elbasvir/grazoprevir. Elbasvir and grazoprevir are primarily metabolized in the liver and undergo minimal renal elimination. The data for the immediate treatment arm have been published (Roth, 2015). Seventy-five percent of the study participants were on hemodialysis, and 45% were African American. A small number of patients with compensated cirrhosis were included. Intention-to-treat (ITT) and modified intention-to-treat (mITT) SVR12 rates were 94% and 99%, respectively. There were no changes in erythropoietin use, hemoglobin, or other adverse events in the treatment groups compared to placebo. None of the genotype 1a patients with baseline NS5A resistance-associated substitutions (RASs) experienced viral relapse. The only reported relapse occurred in a patient with genotype 1b. The basis for the lack of impact of NS5A RASs on SVR rates in this population is unclear but may relate to the moderately increased area under the curve (AUC) with grazoprevir and elbasvir observed in patients with stage 4/5 CKD (Zepatier prescribing information, 2019). Among 99 patients assigned to deferred treatment 97 (98%) achieved SVR (Bruchfeld, 2017). In patients with genotype 1a, SVR12 was 85% (11/13) among patients with detectable baseline NS5A RASs and 100% (98/98) among those patients without RASs. One serious adverse event occurred during the deferred treatment (interstitial nephritis) that was considered study drug related. Overall, the efficacy of this regimen among patients assigned to deferred treatment reflected the findings of the immediate treatment group, and the overall efficacy remained high in all subgroups including cirrhosis, diabetes, and hemodialysis. These data support no modification of elbasvir plus grazoprevir dosing for patients on hemodialysis. Of the 3 patients who relapsed in both the immediate and deferred treatment groups, 2 had genotype 1a infection with baseline NS5AA RASs, underscoring the importance of baseline NS5A RASs affecting treatment outcome with this regimen (Bruchfeld, 2017). Based on these data, daily fixed-dose elbasvir/grazoprevir is recommended for the treatment of genotype 1 in patients with severely compromised renal function. While C-SURFER did not evaluate patients with genotype 4, it is likely that the high efficacy of elbasvir/grazoprevir in genotype 1 and 4 infection in persons with normal renal function can be extrapolated to persons with genotype 4 and CKD stage 4/5. Treatment with elbasvir/grazoprevir in persons with CKD has been shown to be cost-effective in the United States (Elbasha, 2016). Several real-world studies demonstrated the effectiveness of elbasvir/grazoprevir in persons with genotype 1 or 4 infection. In a retrospective cohort analysis from the TRIO network, 99% (113/114) of patients with stage 4/5 CKD achieved SVR12 (Flamm, 2018). A nationwide retrospective observational cohort study of patients in the US Veterans Health Administration system identified 5961 patients (42.5% genotype 1a, 55.0% genotype 1b) who completed elbasvir/grazoprevir therapy, including 860 patients with stage 3 CKD, 740 patients with stage 4/5 CKD, and 4361 controls (eGFR ≥60 mL/min). The SVR rates were 97% overall, 96% for those with an eGFR ≥60 mL/min, 98% for patients with stage 3 CKD, and 97% for participants with stage 4/5 CKD. No statistically significant differences were found in the SVR rates in persons with or without dialysis among the stage 4/5 CKD patients (adjusted OR 0.91; 95% CI 0.56-1.47 and OR 1.74; 95% CI 0.63-4.81) compared with those with an eGFR ≥60 mL/min (Choi, 2020). Elbasvir, Grazoprevir, and Ledipasvir Metabolism Elbasvir, grazoprevir, and ledipasvir are primarily metabolized in the liver and undergo minimal renal elimination. While HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 4 Patients with Renal Impairment Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) exposures to many of these agents are higher in severe renal impairment—presumably due to effects of uremic toxins, parathyroid hormone, and/or cytokines on hepatic metabolism—dose adjustments are not required in the setting of renal impairment. Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 4 of 4 Kidney Transplant Patients Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Kidney Transplant Patients Post Kidney Transplantation: Genotype 1-6 Recommended and alternative regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for: Treatment-Naive and Non-DAA-Experienced Kidney Transplant Patients With Genotype 1-6 Infection, With or Without Compensated Cirrhosisa RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg)b 12 weeks I, Ac IIa, Cd Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) 12 weeks IIa, C Genotype 1, 4, 5, or 6 only: Daily fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) 12 weeks I, A ALTERNATIVE DURATION RATING Genotype 1 or 4 only: Daily fixed-dose combination of elbasvir (50 mg)/ grazoprevir (100 mg) for patients without baseline NS5A RASse for elbasvir 12 weeks I, B a For decompensated cirrhosis, please refer to the appropriate section. b Dosing is 3 coformulated tablets (glecaprevir [100 mg]/pibrentasvir [40 mg]) taken once daily. Please refer to the prescribing information. c Based on evidence for patients without cirrhosis. d Based on evidence for patients with compensated cirrhosis. e Includes genotype 1a resistance-associated substitutions at amino acid positions 28, 30, 31, or 93 known to confer antiviral resistance. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 4 Kidney Transplant Patients Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommended regimen for: DAA-Experienced Kidney Transplant Patients With Genotype 1-6 Infection, With or Without Compensated Cirrhosisa RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/voxilaprevir (100 mg), with or without ribavirinb 12 weeks IIa, C a Excludes CTP class B and class C patients. For decompensated cirrhosis, please refer to the appropriate section. b For patients with cirrhosis and multiple negative baseline characteristic, consideration should be given to adding ribavirin. If renal dysfunction is present, a lower starting dose is recommended. Maximum ribavirin dose is 1000 mg/d for patients who weigh <75 kg and 1200 mg/d for those who weigh ≥75 kg. For additional information on treatment of DAA failures post transplant, treatment of decompensated cirrhosis following transplantation, treatment of transplant recipients from HCV-positive donors, and post-transplant drug-drug interactions, please see Patients Who Develop Recurrent HCV Infection Post Liver Transplantation. Recommended Regimens Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir The phase 3, open-label, single arm MAGELLAN-2 study evaluated a 12-week course of the pangenotypic regimen of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in 100 liver (n=80) and kidney (n=20) transplant recipients with genotypes 1-6 infection who were at least 3 months post transplant. Cirrhotic patients were excluded. SVR12 was achieved in 98% of patients; a single patient experienced virologic failure (Reau 2018). The safety profile was excellent with 1 treatment discontinuation for an adverse event not considered to be therapy related. One rejection episode occurred in a liver transplant recipient. While glecaprevir/pibrentasvir is an effective pangenotypic regimen as demonstrated in the nontransplant population, there were no genotype 5 transplant recipients in the study. There are potential drug-drug interactions with cyclosporine. Review the DAA interactions with calcineurin inhibitors table in the post liver transplantation section before prescribing HCV DAA therapy to a renal transplant recipient. Ledipasvir/Sofosbuvir A recent phase 2, open-label clinical trial evaluated the safety and efficacy of the daily fixed-dose combination of ledipasvir (90 mg)/sofosbuvir (400 mg) in 114 kidney transplant recipients who were more than 6 months post transplant (Colombo, 2017). Enrolled patients had genotype 1 (91%) or 4 infection; 69% were treatment naive and 15% had compensated cirrhosis. Patients were randomized to 12 weeks or 24 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir. Median eGFR prior to treatment was 50 mL/min for patients in the 12-week study arm and 60 mL/min for those in the 24-week arm. Overall SVR12 was 100% (114/114). Adverse events were common (64%) and serious adverse events occurred in 13 patients (11%); a single participant discontinued treatment because of an adverse event. Four patients with an eGFR >40 mL/min at baseline experienced a decrease to <30 mL/min during therapy. The eGFR increased to >30 mL/min at the last visit recorded in 3 of these patients; 1 patient who had interrupted study treatment had a final eGFR of 14.4 mL/min. All but 1 of the 6 patients with compensated cirrhosis whose eGFR decreased to <40 mL/min continued study treatment without HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 4 Kidney Transplant Patients Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) interruption; none permanently discontinued study treatment. Several additional reports have described successful outcomes with combination direct-acting antiviral (DAA) therapy in kidney transplant recipients (Saxena, 2017); (Sawinski, 2016). One study evaluated treatment safety and efficacy among 20 HCV-infected kidney transplant recipients (88% genotype 1; 50% with advanced fibrosis; 60% treatment-experienced with an interferon-based regimen) who received sofosbuvir-based therapy. Various regimens were used, including simeprevir plus sofosbuvir (n=9); ledipasvir/sofosbuvir (n=7); sofosbuvir plus ribavirin (n=3); and daclatasvir plus sofosbuvir (n=1). SVR12 was 100% (Sawinski, 2016). Two patients required dose reductions due to anemia associated with ribavirin use. However, no significant changes in serum creatinine or proteinuria, or graft rejection were seen before or after treatment. Forty-five percent of patients required dose reduction of immunosuppressive agents while on antiviral therapy. Real-world data from the ongoing HCV-TARGET study have also demonstrated the efficacy of DAA therapy in patients with kidney transplant and in those with dual liver and kidney transplant (Saxena, 2017). Various regimens were used, including sofosbuvir/ledipasvir ± ribavirin (85%); sofosbuvir plus daclatasvir ± ribavirin (9%); and ombitasvir/paritaprevir/ritonavir plus dasabuvir ± ribavirin (6%). SVR12 was 95% in those with kidney transplant and 91% in dual liver and kidney transplant recipients. No change in calcineurin inhibitor dose is needed for patients receiving ledipasvir/sofosbuvir. Review the DAA interactions with calcineurin inhibitors table in the post liver transplantation section before prescribing HCV DAA therapy to a renal transplant recipient. Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir There are no published clinical trials regarding the use of the fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg) in kidney transplant recipients. There are, however, significant data addressing the efficacy and safety of this regimen in the nontransplant and liver transplant settings. In liver transplant recipients (discussed in Patients who Develop Recurrent HCV Infection Post Liver Transplantation), the safety and efficacy of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir for 12 weeks was evaluated in 79 patients (n=5 with cirrhosis; n=4 DAA experienced) with genotype 1-4 infection (Agarwal, 2018). Treatment was well-tolerated with 99% of patients completing treatment. SVR12 rates by genotype were 93% genotype 1a (n=15); 96% genotype 1b (n=22); 100% genotype 2 (n=3); 97% genotype 3 (n=35); and 100% genotype 4 (n=4). In the nontransplant setting (discussed in detail in the Initial and Retreatment sections), the phase 3, double-blind, placebo- controlled ASTRAL-1 study demonstrated an overall SVR of 99% among 742 treatment-naive or -experienced patients with genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 infection (Feld, 2015). In the phase 3, open-label ASTRAL-3 study, 552 treatment-naive or -experienced patients with genotype 3 (with or without compensated cirrhosis) were randomized in a 1:1 ratio to 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir or 24 weeks of sofosbuvir plus weight-based ribavirin. SVR12 was 95% for the sofosbuvir/velpatasvir treatment arm, which was superior to the SVR12 80% among patients receiving sofosbuvir plus ribavirin for 24 weeks (Foster, 2015a). No change in calcineurin inhibitor dose is needed for patients receiving sofosbuvir/velpatasvir. Review the DAA interactions with calcineurin inhibitors table in the post liver transplantation section before prescribing HCV DAA therapy to a renal transplant recipient. Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir/Voxilaprevir To date, there are no published clinical trials evaluating use of the daily fixed-dose combination of sofosbuvir (400 mg)/velpatasvir (100 mg)/voxilaprevir (100 mg) in kidney transplant recipients. There are, however, significant data addressing the efficacy and safety of this regimen in the nontransplant setting (Degasperi, 2019); (Llaneras, 2019); (Bourliere, 2017); (Jacobson, 2017); (Soriano, 2017); (Saxena, 2016). Two phase 3, open label, randomized clinical trials were conducted to determine the safety and efficacy of HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 4 Kidney Transplant Patients Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir in nontransplant patients previously treated with a DAA regimen. The POLARIS-1 study included nontransplant patients who had previously received a regimen containing and NS5A inhibitor. Patients were randomized to 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir or placebo. SVR for patients on active treatment was 96%. POLARIS-4 compared 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir to 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir in non-NS5A inhibitor DAA-experienced nontransplant patients (Bourliere, 2017). Overall, 69% of participants were previously exposed to sofosbuvir plus ribavirin ± peginterferon, and 11% were exposed to sofosbuvir plus simeprevir. Cirrhosis was common, 46% in both study arms. SVR12 rates were 98% with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir and 90% with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir. Velpatasvir is a substrate for CYP3A4, CYP2C8, and CYP2B6, a weak inhibitor of P-gp and OATP transporters, and a moderate inhibitor of the breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) membrane transporter. As such, velpatasvir is moderately affected by potent inhibitors and, to a greater extent, potent inducers of enzyme/drug transporter systems (Mogalian, 2016). Based on this profile, which is similar to ledipasvir, clinically significant drug-drug interactions would not be expected for coadministration of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir with common immunosuppressive agents (eg, tacrolimus, cyclosporine, corticosteroids, mycophenolate mofetil, or everolimus). Review the DAA interactions with calcineurin inhibitors table in the post liver transplantation section before prescribing HCV DAA therapy to a renal transplant recipient. Alternative Regimen Elbasvir/Grazoprevir Data from small, real-world studies evaluating elbasvir/grazoprevir are available. One such study evaluated 11 kidney transplant recipients with significant kidney function impairment (GFR <40 mL/min) treated with elbasvir/grazoprevir for 12 to 16 weeks. SVR12 was 100% (Eisenberger, 2019). There are significant drug-drug interactions with cyclosporine. Review the DAA interactions with calcineurin inhibitors table in the post liver transplantation section before prescribing HCV DAA therapy to a renal transplant recipient. Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 4 of 4 Management of Acute HCV Infection Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Management of Acute HCV Infection Acute hepatitis C infection is most often asymptomatic and frequently develops into chronic infection. Case reports of acute hepatitis C have increased in the US since 2010 and have most often been associated with parenteral exposures to blood or body fluids (CDC, 2019). Although HCV infection is primarily associated with injection drug use, certain behaviors (eg, unprotected [without a condom] receptive anal intercourse)—primarily among men who have sex with men—are risk factors for transmission (Lockart, 2019); (Price, 2019). The syndemic of opioid use disorder and HCV and HIV transmission contributes to the burden of disease in certain populations (Butt, 2020). Diagnosis of Acute HCV Recommended Testing for Diagnosing Acute HCV Infection RECOMMENDED RATING HCV antibody and HCV RNA testing are recommended when acute HCV infection is suspected due to exposure, clinical presentation, or elevated aminotransferase levels (see Testing Algorithm figure). I, C Recommendations for HCV testing are also found in the Testing and Linkage to Care section. Diagnosis of acute HCV infection enables estimation of annual incidence rates and transmission patterns, thereby facilitating implementation and assessment of prevention programs. At the individual level, a diagnosis of acute infection expedites linkage to care, counseling regarding high-risk behavior, and timely interventions to reduce virus transmission and liver disease progression (Bruneau, 2014). Some persons involved in high-risk behaviors practice serosorting, defined as using HCV antibody serostatus to determine whether to engage in high-risk behaviors with certain individuals (Smith, 2013). Thus, undiagnosed acutely infected persons may be at greater risk of transmitting HCV to their presumably seronegative contacts than would be expected by chance. The best laboratory evidence to support a diagnosis of acute HCV infection is a positive HCV RNA test in the setting of a negative HCV antibody test (identification during the seronegative window period) (Cox, 2005), or a positive HCV antibody test after a prior negative HCV antibody test (seroconversion). There are rare instances in which these approaches may be misleading, such as in immunosuppressed individuals with impaired antibody production (Chamot, 1990). Discrete Exposure The aforementioned types of clear, laboratory-based documentation of acute HCV infection are most easily achieved when there has been a discrete, known or suspected exposure (eg, after new onset or a change in drug injection practice, a percutaneous needle-stick exposure to an HCV-infected individual, a potentially nonsterile tattoo, or sexual assault). In those instances, baseline HCV antibody and RNA testing should be done within 48 hours of the exposure to document whether there was antecedent HCV infection (see Testing Algorithm figure). If baseline testing is negative, repeat testing is recommended. Frequency of testing can be tailored based on management objectives (eg, monthly testing to identify and treat acute infection). If baseline HCV antibody testing is positive but RNA HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 5 Management of Acute HCV Infection Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) testing is negative, repeat HCV RNA and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) testing is recommended to identify an acute reinfection. When baseline HCV antibody and RNA testing are both positive, the person most likely already has chronic HCV infection from prior exposure(s). No Discrete Exposure Individuals suspected of having acute HCV infection often do not have a discrete exposure or have no prior baseline testing, making a diagnosis of acute infection more difficult (see Blood Test Interpretation Table). Acute infection should be suspected if there is a new rise in the ALT level without an alternate cause (Blackard, 2008); (Kim, 2013). Acute infection should also be suspected when there are low (especially <104 IU/mL) or fluctuating (>1 log10 IU/mL) HCV RNA values, or spontaneous clearance. These patterns do not commonly occur outside of the first 6 months after HCV infection (McGovern, 2009). In those with a high index of suspicion for HCV exposure (eg, recently relapsed injection drug use, other high-risk exposure), an HCV PCR should be repeated, if negative. Patients suspected of having acute HCV infection should also have a laboratory evaluation to exclude other or coexisting causes of acute hepatitis (eg, hepatitis A virus, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis delta virus if chronically infected with hepatitis B, and autoimmune hepatitis) (Kushner, 2015). In patients with sexual acquisition of acute HCV, evaluation for concurrent genital ulcerative disease and proctitis is recommended (Todesco, 2019); (Goldenberg, 2017). Patients should also have HIV testing. Table. Interpretation of Blood Tests for Diagnosis of Acute HCV Infection TEST INTERPRETATION FOR DIAGNOSIS OF ACUTE HCV HCV Antibody Test may be negative during the first 6 weeks after exposure. Seroconversion may be delayed or absent in immunosuppressed individuals. Presence of HCV antibody alone does not distinguish between acute vs chronic infection. HCV RNA Viral fluctuations >1 log10 IU/mL may indicate acute HCV infection. HCV RNA may be transiently negative during acute HCV infection. Presence of HCV RNA alone does not distinguish between acute vs chronic infection. ALT Fluctuating ALT peaks suggest acute infection. ALT may be normal during acute HCV infection. ALT may be elevated due to other liver insults, such as alcohol consumption. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 5 Management of Acute HCV Infection Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Pharmacologic Prophylaxis Pharmacologic Prophylaxis Not Recommended NOT RECOMMENDED RATING Pre-exposure or post-exposure prophylaxis with antiviral therapy is not recommended. III, C There are no data on the efficacy or cost-effectiveness of antiviral therapy for pre-exposure or post-exposure prophylaxis of HCV infection. Medical Management and Monitoring of Acute HCV Infection HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 5 Management of Acute HCV Infection Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommendations for Medical Management and Monitoring of Acute HCV Infection RECOMMENDED RATING After the initial diagnosis of acute HCV with viremia (defined as quantifiable RNA), HCV treatment should be initiated without awaiting spontaneous resolution. I, B Counseling is recommended for patients with acute HCV infection to avoid hepatotoxic insults, including hepatotoxic drugs (eg, acetaminophen) and alcohol consumption, and to reduce the risk of HCV transmission to others. I, C Referral to an addiction medicine specialist is recommended for patients with acute HCV infection related to substance use. I, B Patients with acute HCV infection should be treated upon initial diagnosis without awaiting spontaneous resolution, using a “test and treat” strategy and according to the simplified approach, if eligible. Real-world data have demonstrated a reduction in HCV viremia prevalence and incidence with unrestricted access to HCV therapy (Boerekamps, 2018). In addition, mathematical modeling suggests that DAA treatment scale-up, especially among those at highest risk of transmission, can reduce HCV incidence and prevalence (Martin, 2013); (Martin, 2016). Moreover, delay introduced by waiting for spontaneous clearance may be associated with loss to follow up. Individuals with acute HCV should be counseled to reduce behaviors that could result in virus transmission, such as sharing injection equipment and engaging in high-risk sexual practices. Because the risk of transmission of other bloodborne, sexually transmitted infections (eg, HIV and HBV) is higher in the acute infection phase, some experts counsel patients with acute HCV to consider using barrier precautions, even in a stable monogamous relationship (see Testing and Linkage to Care). For individuals with acute HCV infection who have a history of recent injection drug use, referral to harm reduction services and an addiction medicine specialist is recommended when appropriate (Litwin, 2009); (Strathdee, 2005). Patients with acute hepatitis C are often asymptomatic or have nonspecific symptoms (eg, fatigue, anorexia, mild or moderate abdominal pain, low-grade fever, nausea, and/or vomiting) that frequently are not recognized as being associated with acute HCV infection. A small proportion (<25%) of patients with acute HCV develop jaundice. Patients diagnosed with acute HCV should initially be monitored with hepatic panels (ALT, aspartate aminotransferase [AST], bilirubin, and international normalized ratio [INR] in the setting of an increasing bilirubin level) at 2- to 4-week intervals (Blackard, 2008). With treatment, a rapid improvement of laboratory parameters is expected. There is no need to alter concomitant medications that are metabolized by hepatic enzymes unless there is concern for developing acute liver failure (eg, increasing bilirubin level and INR). Acetaminophen and alcohol consumption should be avoided during acute HCV infection (Proeschold-Bell, 2012); (Dieperink, 2010); (Whitlock, 2004). Hospitalization is rarely indicated unless nausea and vomiting are severe. Although acute liver failure is very rare (<1%), it represents a serious and life-threatening complication of acute HCV infection. Patients with an INR >1.5 and those who exhibit any signs of acute liver failure (eg, hepatic encephalopathy) should be referred to a liver transplant center immediately. Use of HCV antiviral regimens in acute liver failure should be managed by a clinician experienced in HCV treatment, ideally in consultation with a liver transplant specialist. HCV infection spontaneously clears in 20% to 50% of patients (Kamal, 2008). Clearance of acute HCV infection occurs within 6 months of the estimated time of infection (median, 16.5 weeks) in at least 2/3 of patients who spontaneously clear HCV. Only 11% of those who remain viremic at 6 months will spontaneously clear the infection at a later time (Grebely, 2014). Patients who have spontaneously cleared should not be treated with antiviral therapy. However, they should be HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 4 of 5 Management of Acute HCV Infection Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) counseled about the possibility of reinfection and tested routinely for this development if risk behaviors are ongoing (see Testing and Linkage to Care). Of note, transient suppression of viremia can occur in those with acute HCV infection, even among those who progress to chronic infection. Thus, a single undetectable HCV RNA test result is insufficient to declare spontaneous clearance (see Testing and Linkage to Care) (Villano, 1999); (Mosley, 2008). Predictors of spontaneous clearance include jaundice, elevated ALT level, hepatitis B virus surface antigen (HBsAg) positivity, female sex, younger age, genotype 1 infection, and host genetic polymorphisms, most notably those near the IL28B gene (Kamal, 2008); (Mosley, 2008). Antiviral Therapy Recommended Regimens for Patients With Acute HCV Infection RECOMMENDED RATING Owing to high efficacy and safety, the same regimens that are recommended for chronic HCV infection are recommended for acute infection. IIa, C A number of studies have evaluated DAA treatment of acute HCV infection. Small single-arm, uncontrolled studies have evaluated 6 or 8 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir. One such study demonstrated 100% SVR with 8 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir among 27 men with acute HCV and HIV-coinfection (Naggie, 2019). Investigators conducting another study evaluated 6 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir in a similar cohort (25/26 with HIV coinfection). Among participants with genotype 1 infection, 79% (15/19) achieved SVR12; 71% (5/7) of those with genotype 4 infection achieved SVR12 with this shortened regimen. Among the 6 individuals whose treatment did not lead to SVR12, there were 3 relapses (all had baseline HCV RNA levels >7 log10 IU/mL). Three participants achieved SVR4 but were lost to follow- up (Rockstroh, 2017b). A phase 2 study followed a similar treatment protocol (ie, 6 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir) among 20 individuals with genotype 1 HCV monoinfection, all of whom achieved SVR12 (Deterding, 2017). An open-label, single-arm, multicenter pilot study evaluated the efficacy of 6 weeks of the pangenotypic regimen glecaprevir/pibrentasvir among persons with acute/recent HCV infection (ie, duration of infection <12 months). SVR12 was 90% (27/30); a single virological failure occurred in a man with genotype 1a, HIV coinfection, and a viral load of 7.7 log10 IU/mL. This patient was successfully retreated (Martinello, 2020). In the only randomized trial to date, investigators compared 6 vs 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir in the international REACT trial of acute/recent infection. The study was stopped early due to inferiority of the shortened (ie, 6 week) arm. In the 6-week arm, 81.7% (76/93) (on ITT) and 89.4% (76/85) (on mITT) of participants achieved SVR with 6 relapses and 8 nonvirologic failures. In the 12-week group, 90.5% (86/95) on ITT and 97.7% (86/88) (on mITT) achieved SVR with no virologic failures (3 participants were lost to follow-up). There were no clear predictors of relapse aside from shorter treatment duration (Matthews, 2021). To date, there are insufficient data to support a particular regimen or treatment duration outside of a clinical trial. Until more definitive data are available, treatment as described for chronic hepatitis C is recommended (see Initial Treatment of HCV Infection). Pangenotypic regimens are recommended if HCV genotyping is unavailable or if concern of exposure to more than 1 genotype exists. Using the same regimens to treat acute/recent HCV as for chronic HCV infection also simplifies management, as defining acute HCV may be clinically challenging. Last reviewed: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 5 of 5 HCV in Pregnancy Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) HCV in Pregnancy Testing Recommendation for Universal Hepatitis C Screening in Pregnancy RECOMMENDED RATING As part of prenatal care, all pregnant persons should be tested for HCV infection with each pregnancy, ideally at the initial visit. (See Recommendations for Initial HCV Testing and Follow-Up.) I, B It has been estimated that up to 29,000 HCV-infected women gave birth each year from 2011 to 2014 (Ly, 2017). Additionally, there has been an increase in HCV among young adults, including women of childbearing age (Watts, 2017); (Koneru, 2016); (Kuncio, 2016). Identifying HCV infection as women engage in prenatal care would allow for appropriate assessment of liver disease status and ideally facilitate linkage to HCV care after delivery. In addition, prenatal HCV diagnosis is a prerequisite for appropriate screening and care for exposed children. Risk factor-based HCV screening has never been shown to be effective (Kuncio, 2015); (Waruingi, 2015); (Fernandez, 2016) and inconsistent screening and counseling practices have been reported among obstetricians and gynecologists (Boaz, 2003). Consequently, the US Preventative Task Force (Owens, 2020), US Centers for Disease Control (Schillie, 2020), have published recommendations for universal HCV screening of all adults, including screening during prenatal care. Recently, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists have issued the Practice Advisory to test all women at the beginning of each pregnancy for HCV (https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/practice-advisory/articles/2021/05/routine-hepatitis-c-virus-screening-in- pregnant-individuals). Testing at the initiation of prenatal care is considered optimal to maximize opportunities for education, referral, and appropriate testing for the exposed infant. Early identification is key as women living with HCV and their exposed infants are at significant risk for not linking to appropriate HCV evaluation or care. Women should be tested with an HCV-antibody test. If positive, this should be followed with testing for HCV RNA. HCV-infected pregnant persons should be linked to care so that antiviral treatment can be initiated at the appropriate time (see Testing and Linkage to Care section). Recent modeling studies demonstrate that universal HCV screening in pregnancy is cost-effective and would reduce long-term morbidity with linkage to care and treatment (Tasillo, 2019 ). Infants of HCV-infected women should be tested and followed as described in the HCV in Children section. The Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine recommends several obstetrical practices in women with HCV infection, including preference for amniocentesis over chorionic villus sampling when invasive prenatal diagnostic testing is indicated, as well as avoidance of internal fetal monitoring during labor, prolonged rupture of membranes, and episiotomies (Hughes, 2017). Whom to Treat HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 4 HCV in Pregnancy Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommendation Regarding HCV Treatment and Pregnancy RECOMMENDED RATING For women of reproductive age with known HCV infection, antiviral therapy is recommended before considering pregnancy, whenever practical and feasible, to reduce the risk of HCV transmission to future offspring. I, B Women of reproductive age with HCV should be counseled about the benefit of antiviral treatment prior to pregnancy to improve the health of the mother and eliminate the low risk of mother-to-child transmission (MTCT). People who become pregnant while on DAA therapy (with or without ribavirin) should discuss the risks versus benefits of continuing treatment with their physicians. Ribavirin is contraindicated in pregnancy due to its known teratogenicity. In addition, the risk for teratogenicity persists for up to 6 months after ribavirin cessation and applies to women taking ribavirin and female partners of men taking ribavirin. If exposed to ribavirin, they should also have their maternal and fetal outcomes reported to the ribavirin pregnancy registry (also see Recommended Monitoring for Pregnancy-Related Issues Prior to and During Antiviral Therapy That Includes Ribavirin). There are no large-scale clinical trials evaluating the safety of direct-acting antivirals (DAAs) in pregnancy. A small study evaluating the pharmacokinetics of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir in pregnancy demonstrated 100% SVR12 and no safety concerns. Similarly, an international case series of 15 pregnant persons treated with ledipasvir/sofosbuvir reported 100% SVR12 and no early safety concerns in the women or their infants (Yattoo, 2018); (Chappell, 2020). Currently, there are no available data on the use of pangenotypic regimens during pregnancy. Despite the lack of a recommendation, treatment can be considered during pregnancy on an individual basis after a patient-physician discussion about the potential risks and benefits. Monitoring During Pregnancy Recommendations for Monitoring HCV-Infected Women During Pregnancy RECOMMENDED RATING HCV RNA and routine liver function tests are recommended at initiation of prenatal care for HCV- antibody–positive pregnant persons to assess the risk of mother-to-child transmission (MTCT) and severity of liver disease. I, B All pregnant persons with HCV infection should receive prenatal and intrapartum care that is appropriate for their individual obstetric risk(s) as there is no currently known intervention to reduce MTCT. I, B In HCV-infected pregnant persons with pruritus or jaundice, there should be a high index of suspicion for intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP) with subsequent assessment of alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and serum bile acids. I, B HCV-infected persons with cirrhosis should be counseled about the increased risk of adverse maternal and perinatal outcomes. Antenatal and perinatal care should be coordinated with a maternal- fetal medicine (ie, high-risk pregnancy) obstetrician. I, B HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 4 HCV in Pregnancy Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommendations for Monitoring HCV-Infected Women During Pregnancy Pregnancy Impact on HCV Infection Pregnancy itself does not appear to negatively affect chronic HCV infection. In general, serum ALT levels decrease during the first and third trimesters of pregnancy and increase after delivery. HCV RNA levels rise during the first and third trimesters, reaching a peak during the third trimester, and decrease postpartum (Conte, 2000); (Gervais, 2000). These effects are likely due to the immunosuppressive effects of pregnancy and increased maternal plasma volume. HCV- infected pregnant persons have a higher incidence of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP) (pooled OR 20.40 [95% CI, 9.39-44.33, I2=55%]) based on a meta-analysis of 3 studies when compared to noninfected pregnant persons (Wijarnpreecha, 2017). ICP is associated with an increased rate of adverse maternal and fetal outcomes; all patients with this syndrome should be immediately referred to a high-risk obstetrical specialist for monitoring and treatment. HCV Infection Impact on Pregnancy and Perinatal Outcomes Although some studies show an increased risk of adverse perinatal outcomes (eg, preterm delivery, low birth weight infants, and congenital anomalies) with maternal HCV infection, these risks are confounded by comorbid conditions, such as substance use (Connell, 2011). However, pregnant persons with cirrhosis are at increased risk for poor maternal outcomes (ie, preeclampsia, cesarean section, hemorrhagic complication, and death) and neonatal outcomes (ie, preterm delivery, low birth weight, and neonatal death) (Puljic, 2016); (Tan, 2008). Women with cirrhosis should be counseled about these increased risks and care should be coordinated with specialists in maternal-fetal medicine. Hepatitis C MTCT occurs at an overall rate of 5% to 15% (Jhaveri, 2015); (Shebl, 2009); (Mast, 2005); (Ceci, 2001), with the number that progress to chronic infection being 3% to 5%. No specific risk factor predicts transmission and no specific intervention (eg, antiviral, mode of delivery, or others) has been demonstrated to reduce HCV transmission—except for suppression of HIV replication in women with HIV/HCV coinfection (Checa Cabot, 2013). Given the potential associated risk of MTCT, it is advisable to avoid invasive procedures (eg, fetal scalp monitors and forceps delivery). The neuropsychiatric and systemic side effects of interferon-based agents and the pregnancy category X rating of ribavirin made studies involving these drugs to interrupt MTCT untenable for safety reasons. It is important to note that DAAs have not been formally studied as a way to interrupt MTCT. DAAs have not demonstrated significant toxicity in animal studies, and antiviral medication use has become the standard of care for people with HIV and hepatitis B infection. Therefore, it is realistic to think that DAAs could be used in the future to interrupt MTCT. However, with a low transmission rate, improved methods to identify mothers who are likely to transmit are needed to reduce the number needed to treat below 20 to prevent 1 transmission event. DAA therapy is not recommended during pregnancy to reduce MTCT due to the current lack of safety and efficacy data. Postpartum Issues Recommendations Regarding Breastfeeding and Postpartum Care for HCV- Infected Women RECOMMENDED RATING Breastfeeding is not contraindicated in women with HCV infection, except when the mother has cracked, damaged, or bleeding nipples, or in the context of HIV coinfection. I, B Women with HCV infection should have their HCV RNA reevaluated after delivery to assess for spontaneous clearance. I, B HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 4 HCV in Pregnancy Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommendations Regarding Breastfeeding and Postpartum Care for HCV- Infected Women HCV and Breastfeeding Breastfeeding is not a risk for HCV MTCT (CDC, 1998) with studies showing similar rates of maternal infection in breast- fed and bottle-fed infants (Resti, 1998). However, given the associated risks of HCV transmission with blood exposure and HIV transmission with breastfeeding, it is recommended that HCV-infected women who breastfeed abstain from doing so while their nipples are cracked, damaged, or bleeding, and in the context of HIV/HCV coinfection. Spontaneous Clearance in the Postpartum Period HCV RNA levels can fluctuate during pregnancy and the postpartum period. The most frequently observed pattern is a steady rise in HCV RNA levels during pregnancy followed by a slight or significant drop (>3 to 4 log10) in the postpartum period (Lin, 2000). This is most likely due to the release of tolerance in HCV-specific T lymphocyte responses that develop during pregnancy (Honegger, 2013). Spontaneous clearance of HCV can occur in the postpartum period. Previous studies with small numbers of patients demonstrated that up to 10% of postpartum women became HCV RNA undetectable (Honegger, 2013); (Hattori, 2003); (Lin, 2000). A recent study from Egypt demonstrated a 25% rate of spontaneous resolution that was strongly associated with the favorable IL28B allele (Hashem, 2017). Given these findings, women should have their HCV RNA re-evaluated after delivery. In that time, HCV RNA could become undetectable or rebound to prepregnancy levels. The possibility of spontaneous viral clearance should be considered for any woman who is being assessed for DAA treatment in the postpartum period. Last update: December 19, 2023 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 4 of 4 HCV in Children Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) HCV in Children Testing Recommendations for HCV Testing of Perinatally Exposed Children and Siblings of Children With HCV Infection RECOMMENDED RATING All children born to HCV-infected women should be tested for HCV infection. Testing is recommended using an antibody-based test at or after 18 months of age. I, A Repetitive HCV RNA testing prior to 18 months of age is not recommended. III, A Children who are anti-HCV positive after 18 months of age should be tested with an HCV-RNA assay after age 3 to confirm chronic hepatitis C infection. I, A The siblings of children with vertically-acquired chronic HCV should be tested for HCV infection, if born from the same mother. I, C Although the prevalence of chronic hepatitis C is lower in children than adults, an estimated 3.5 to 5 million children worldwide have chronic HCV infection (Indolphi, 2019); (Gower, 2014). Data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) indicate that 0.2% of 6- to 11-year-olds (31,000 children) and 0.4% of 12- to 19-year-olds (101,000 adolescents) in the US are HCV antibody positive (Alter, 1999). As birth to a woman with chronic hepatitis C is a known risk for infection, children born to these women should be evaluated and tested for HCV. The rate of mother-to-child transmission (MTCT) of HCV infection is approximately 5%, although rates are higher among women with inadequately controlled HIV coinfection, and women with higher HCV-RNA levels, (>6 log10 IU/mL) (Benova, 2014); (Delotte, 2014); (Cottrell, 2013); (Shebl, 2009). Identifying, following, and treating exposed children is recommended. The preferred assay for evaluation of HCV infection early in life is HCV-RNA testing, as maternal antibodies and consequently anti-HCV assay positivity may persist for 18 months (Aniszewska, 2012 ); (England, 2005). About 25% to 50% of infected infants spontaneously resolve HCV infection (loss of previously detectable HCV RNA) by 4 years of age (Indolfi, 2019); (Garazzino, 2014); (Farmand, 2012); (Yeung, 2007); (EPHCVN, 2005); (Mast, 2005). There is considerable debate about the utility of HCV-RNA testing within the first year of life. Proponents argue that use of a highly sensitive RNA assay early in life can increase the rate of infected infants detected, and that a negative result strongly suggests the infant is not infected while a positive result helps identify HCV cases earlier. Proponents also want to seize opportunity to test in a patient group that is often lost to follow-up. Opponents argue that early testing does not change the need for definitive testing at or after 18 months; HCV RNA is more expensive than an antibody-based test; and there is no intervention or treatment that will occur prior to age 3—because of lack of approved drugs for this age group and to allow for possible spontaneous clearance. One large single center study demonstrated that HCV-RNA testing done in exposed infants aged 2 months to 6 months led to reliable positive and negative results that correlated with ultimate testing at 18 months (Honegger, 2018); (Gowda, 2021). Given these results and the value placed on enhancing HCV HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 11 HCV in Children Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) elimination efforts by reducing missed opportunities for testing, the panel recommends considering HCV RNA testing as early as 2 months of age. There is no value in repeated HCV-RNA testing prior to 18 months of age, but anti-HCV testing should take place at or after 18 months of age. Transmission and Prevention Recommendations for Counseling Parents Regarding Transmission and Prevention in Children with HCV Infection RECOMMENDED RATING Parents should be informed that hepatitis C is not transmitted by casual contact and, as such, children with HCV infection do not pose a risk to other children and can participate in school, sports, and athletic activities, and engage in all other regular childhood activities without restrictions. I, B Parents should be informed that universal precautions should be followed at school and in the home of children with HCV infection. Educate families and children about the risk and routes of HCV transmission, and the techniques for avoiding blood exposure, such as avoiding the sharing of toothbrushes, razors, and nail clippers, and the use of gloves and dilute bleach to clean up blood. I, B HCV-infected children often face discrimination and stigmatization in school and child-care settings that is driven by public misunderstanding regarding hepatitis C transmission. HCV is not transmitted by casual contact in the absence of blood exposure. Families should not be forced to disclose a child’s HCV infection status, and children should not be restricted from any routine childhood activity. The risk of sexual transmission of hepatitis C is considered very low/rare. Sexual transmission occurs but is generally inefficient except among HIV-infected men who have unprotected sex with men (see HCV Testing and Linkage to Care) (Tieu, 2018); (Vaux, 2019); (Schmidt, 2014). Adolescents with HIV infection and those with multiple sexual partners or sexually transmitted infections (STIs) should be encouraged to use barrier precautions to prevent sexual transmission of HCV and other STIs. Other adolescents with HCV infection should be counseled that the risk of sexual transmission is low but barrier precautions are recommended for other reasons (see Testing and Linkage to Care: Table 2 - Measures to Prevent Transmission of HCV). Monitoring and Medical Management Recommendations for Monitoring and Medical Management of Children With HCV Infection RECOMMENDED RATING Routine liver biochemistries at initial diagnosis and at least annually thereafter are recommended to assess for disease progression. I, C Appropriate vaccinations are recommended for children with chronic HCV infection who are not immune to hepatitis B virus and/or hepatitis A virus to prevent these infections. I, C Disease severity assessment via routine laboratory testing and physical examination, as well as use I, B HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 11 HCV in Children Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommendations for Monitoring and Medical Management of Children With HCV Infection of evolving noninvasive modalities (ie, elastography, imaging, or serum fibrosis markers) is recommended for all children with chronic HCV infection. Children with cirrhosis should undergo hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) surveillance and endoscopic surveillance for varices per standard recommendations. I, B Hepatotoxic drugs should be used with caution in children with chronic HCV infection after assessment of potential risks versus benefits of treatment. Use of corticosteroids, cytotoxic chemotherapy, and/or therapeutic doses of acetaminophen are not contraindicated in children with chronic HCV infection. II, C Solid organ transplantation and bone marrow transplantation are not contraindicated in children with chronic HCV infection. II, C Anticipatory guidance about the potential risks of ethanol for progression of liver disease is recommended for adolescents with chronic HCV infection and their families. Abstinence from alcohol and interventions to facilitate cessation of alcohol consumption, when appropriate, are advised for all persons with chronic HCV infection. I, C Liver disease due to chronic HCV infection generally progresses slowly in children, and cirrhosis and liver cancer occur infrequently. Although elevated serum aminotransferase levels are often noted, HCV-infected children younger than 3 years virtually never develop advanced liver disease. The initial assessment of children with chronic HCV infection includes exclusion of other causes of liver disease, assessment of disease severity, and detection of extrahepatic manifestations. Testing for concomitant HBV (HBsAg, anti- HBc, and anti-HBs), HIV (anti-HIV), and immunity to HAV (anti-HAV IgG) are recommended due to shared risk factors and the need to vaccinate nonimmune children who may not have received routine childhood HAV and HBV vaccines. Disease staging in children can be accomplished via physical examination and assessment of routine laboratory parameters including albumin, serum hepatic aminotransferase levels, total bilirubin, international normalized ratio (INR), and platelet count every 6 to 12 months. Serum fibrosis markers also hold promise to stratify disease severity but require further validation (Nielsen, 2019); (Pokorska-Spiewak, 2017); (Mack, 2012). Of note, serum aminotransferase levels are not consistently reflective of disease severity in children. In one study, nearly 33% of children had normal aminotransferase levels despite substantial necroinflammation on biopsy (Casiraghi, 2004). For children in whom advanced liver disease is a concern, liver imaging to evaluate for splenomegaly or venous collaterals is recommended initially, using liver ultrasound instead of CT or MRI due to its widespread availability and lack of ionizing radiation. Although liver biopsy is considered the gold standard regarding the grade of inflammation and stage of fibrosis, sampling artifact is problematic and most patients and practitioners prefer noninvasive alternatives, such as liver elastography, to determine the presence/absence of cirrhosis, particularly in children. Ultrasound-based liver elastography in children requires the use of specialized probes and cutoff values for advanced fibrosis/cirrhosis that differ from those used in adults, but this approach appears promising for monitoring children with chronic HCV infection (Behairy, 2016); (Geng, 2016); (Lee, 2013). Due to the slow rate of fibrosis progression among children, there are few, if any, established bona fide risk factors for disease progression. Development of advanced liver disease in children is infrequent until more than 30 years of infection (Jhaveri, 2011); (Goodman, 2008); (Minola, 2002). However, as in adults, children with comorbid disease—such as obesity with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and congenital heart disease with elevated right heart pressures—and those receiving hepatotoxic drugs should be monitored carefully for disease progression. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 11 HCV in Children Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is rarely encountered among children and has been reported almost exclusively in those with cirrhosis. There are reports that children with chronic HCV infection and a history of childhood leukemia may be at increased risk of developing HCC but evidence is limited (González-Peralta, 2009). In children with cirrhosis, liver ultrasound with or without serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) testing every 6 months is recommended for HCC surveillance per AASLD guidelines (Marrero, 2018). A baseline endoscopy is advisable to detect esophageal varices in children with cirrhosis and every 3 years thereafter in the absence of viral clearance. After successful antiviral therapy, the risk for cirrhosis complications decreases substantially. In children with advanced fibrosis from chronic HCV infection, medications that are known to accelerate hepatic fibrosis (eg, methotrexate) should be avoided, if possible. Similarly, abstinence from alcohol use is strongly advised to minimize disease progression. Although corticosteroids and other immunosuppressants may enhance HCV replication, they are not contraindicated in children with HCV infection and should be prescribed for appropriate indications based on overall risks versus benefits. Of note, icteric flares of HCV—as reported in children and adults with chronic HBV—have not been reported in children receiving an organ transplant or cytotoxic chemotherapy. Although underlying liver disease is a risk factor for development of sinusoidal obstruction syndrome following bone marrow transplantation, the presence of HCV infection should not delay this therapy. To remain well, untreated children with chronic hepatitis C are encouraged to maintain a healthy body weight due to the known deleterious effects of insulin resistance on fibrosis progression with HCV infection (Kukla, 2015); (Petta, 2011); (Cua, 2008); (Moucari, 2008). Commonly used medications, such as antimicrobial agents, antiepileptics, and cardiovascular agents, should be dosed per standard recommendations. However, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and aspirin should be avoided, if possible, in children with cirrhosis and esophageal varices due to concerns of gastrointestinal bleeding and nephrotoxicity. Acetaminophen is a safe and effective analgesic for children with chronic HCV infection when dosed per package insert recommendations. Whom and When to Treat Among Children and Adolescents With HCV Infection Recommendations for Whom and When to Treat Among Children and Adolescents With HCV Infection RECOMMENDED RATING Direct-acting antiviral (DAA) treatment with an approved regimen is recommended for all children and adolescents with HCV infection aged ≥3 years as they will benefit from antiviral therapy, regardless of disease severity. I, B The presence of extrahepatic manifestations—such as cryoglobulinemia, rashes, and glomerulonephritis—as well as advanced fibrosis should lead to early antiviral therapy to minimize future morbidity and mortality. I, C HCV-related, advanced liver disease is uncommon during childhood. However, liver disease progresses over time with increasing fibrosis severity (Indolfi, 2019); (Mizuochi, 2018); (Bortolotti, 2008); (EPHCVN, 2005); (Resti, 2003). Although uncommon, cirrhosis occurs occasionally in children and adolescents (aged <18 years) with HCV infection. Children have a long life expectancy during which HCV complications may develop. Children and adolescents with HCV infection may also transmit the virus to others. The high success rates with DAA regimens in adults with chronic HCV infection have been replicated in the pediatric population. Clinical trial data evaluating DAA regimens in children and adolescents have allowed expanded use of these HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 4 of 11 HCV in Children Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) safe, well-tolerated, efficacious HCV therapies in the pediatric population. Treatment of children as young as 12 years is predicted to be very cost-effective with currently approved DAA regimens as well as those in clinical trials (Nguyen, 2019b ). Another cost-utility analysis compared DAA treatment at age 6 versus delaying treatment until age 18. The researchers reported the incremental cost-utility ratio for early vs delayed DAA therapy was <$12,000 per QALY gained. They concluded that treatment during early childhood is cost-effective and delaying therapy until early adulthood may result in increased lifetime risk of complications of late-stage liver disease (Greenway, 2019). FDA-approved DAA regimens are available for children aged 3 to <18 years with any genotype of HCV. HCV Antiviral Therapy for Children and Adolescents, Without Cirrhosis or With Compensated Cirrhosis (Child-Pugh A) Recommended regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for Treatment-Naive or Interferon-Experienced Children and Adolescents Without Cirrhosis or With Compensated Cirrhosisa RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Combination of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir (weight-based dosing; see Table 1) for children aged ≥ 3 with any genotypeb 8 weeks I, B Combination of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir (weight-based dosing; see Table 2) for children ≥3 of age with any genotype 12 weeks I, B Combination of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir (weight-based dosing; see Table 3) for children aged ≥3 years with genotype 1, 4, 5, or 6 12 weeks I, B a Child-Pugh A b A longer duration of therapy (ie, 16 weeks) may be needed for genotype 3 interferon-experienced patients. Recommended regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for DAA-Experienced Children and Adolescents, Without Cirrhosis or With Compensated Cirrhosisa RECOMMENDED DURATION RATING Genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6: Daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg) for adolescents aged ≥12 years or weighing ≥45 kg with prior exposure to an interferon-based regimen (± ribavirin) and/or sofosbuvir but no exposure to NS3/4A or NS5A protease inhibitors, without cirrhosis 8 weeks I, C Genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6: Combination of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir (weight-based dosing; see Table 1) with prior exposure to an interferon-based regimen (± ribavirin) and/or sofosbuvir but no exposure to NS3/4A or NS5A protease inhibitors, with compensated cirrhosisa 12 weeks I, C Genotype 3: Combination of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir (weight-based dosing; see 16 weeks I, C HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 5 of 11 HCV in Children Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommended regimens listed by pangenotypic, evidence level and alphabetically for DAA-Experienced Children and Adolescents, Without Cirrhosis or With Compensated Cirrhosisa Table 1) with prior exposure to an interferon-based regimen (± ribavirin) and/or sofosbuvir but no exposure to NS3/4A or NS5A protease inhibitors, without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosisa Genotype 1- 6: Combination of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir (weight-based dosing; see Table 1) with prior exposure to NS3/4A protease inhibitors but no NS5A inhibitor exposure, without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosisa 12 weeks I, C Genotype 1- 6: Combination of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir (weight-based dosing; see Table 1) with prior exposure to an NS5A inhibitor but no NS3/4A protease inhibitor exposure, without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosisa 16 weeks I, C Genotypes 1-6: Combination of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir (weight-based dosing; see Table 2) with prior exposure to an interferon-based regimen (± ribavirin) and/or sofosbuvir but no exposure to NS3/4A or NS5A protease inhibitors, without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis 12 weeks I, C Genotypes 1-6: Combination of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir (weight-based dosing; see Table 2) with weight-based ribavirin (see Table 4) with prior exposure to an interferon-based regimen (± ribavirin) and/or sofosbuvir but no exposure to NS3/4A or NS5A protease inhibitors, with decompensated cirrhosis 12 weeks I, C Genotype 4, 5, or 6: Combination of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir (weight-based dosing; see Table 3) for children and adolescents aged ≥3 years with prior exposure to an interferon (± ribavirin) plus an HCV protease inhibitor regimen, without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosisa 12 weeks I, C Genotype 1: Combination of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir (weight-based dosing; see Table 3) for children and adolescents aged ≥3 years with prior exposure to an interferon (± ribavirin) plus an HCV protease inhibitor regimen, without cirrhosis 12 weeks I, C Genotype 1: Combination of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir (weight-based dosing; see Table 3) for children and adolescents aged ≥3 years with prior exposure to an interferon (± ribavirin) plus an HCV protease inhibitor regimen, with compensated cirrhosisa 24 weeks I, C a Child-Pugh A Table 1: Weight-Based Dosing of Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir for Children Aged ≥3 Years of Age Body Weight Once Daily Dose of Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir <20 kg 150 mg/60 mg ≥20 kg to <30 kg 200 mg/80 mg HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 6 of 11 HCV in Children Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Body Weight Once Daily Dose of Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir ≥30 kg to <45 kg 250 mg/100 mg 45 kg and greater or 12 years of age and older 300 mg / 120 mg / day HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 7 of 11 HCV in Children Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Table 2: Weight-based dosing for sofosbuvir/velpatasvir fixed dose combination in children ≥ 3 years of age Body Weight Once Daily Dose of Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir < 17 kg 150 mg/37.5 mg 17 - < 30 kg 200 mg/50 mg ≧ 30 kg 400 mg/100 mg HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 8 of 11 HCV in Children Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Table 3: Weight-Based Dosing of Ledipasvir/Sofosbuvir for Children Aged ≥3 Years Body Weight Once Daily Dose of Ledipasvir/Sofosbuvir <17 kg 33.75 mg/150 mg 17 to <35 kg 45 mg/200 mg ≥35 kg 90 mg/400 mg per day Table 4. Weight-Based Dosing of Ribavirin for Children Aged ≥3 Years Body Weight Daily Dose of Ribavirin (divided AM and PM) <47 kg 15 mg/kg 47 to 49 kg 600 mg 50 to 65 kg 800 mg 66 to 80 kg 1000 mg >80 kg 1200 mg Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir The daily fixed-dose combination of glecaprevir (300 mg)/pibrentasvir (120 mg) was approved for adolescents aged 12 through 17 years in April 2019. In the registration trial, 47 adolescents were treated with the adult-approved coformulated preparation; the duration of treatment was based on viral genotype, prior treatment, and cirrhosis status (Jonas, 2019). Genotypes 1 through 4 were represented in the trial. Two participants were HIV coinfected, none had cirrhosis, and 11 had a prior treatment failure with peginterferon/ribavirin. SVR12 was 100%. The study drugs were well tolerated with no serious adverse events and no drug discontinuations. Although there are no data from the adolescent population, EXPEDITION-8 evaluated 8 weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir among 343 treatment-naive adults with genotype 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 and compensated cirrhosis. Overall SVR12 rates were 99.7% (334/335) in the per-protocol population and 97.7% (335/343) in the intention-to-treat population (Brown, 2019). Similarly, FDA approval and HCV guidance panel HCV treatment recommendations for DAA-experienced adolescents are based on clinical trial data from adults (Asselah, 2018b); (Puoti, 2018); (Wyles, 2018); (Zeuzem, 2018); (Forns, 2017). Part 2 of the DORA trial examined the pharmacokinetics, safety and efficacy of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir among children aged 3 to <12 years with HCV of any genotype who were treatment naive or interferon/ribavirin experienced. Although the trial was designed to include children with compensated cirrhosis, none of the participants had cirrhosis at enrollment. The majority (98%; 78/80) of the children who received glecaprevir/pibrentasvir were treatment naive; a single participant was HIV/HCV coinfected. The overall SVR12 with the optimal drug dosages/ratios was 96%. Of the 2 nonresponders, 1 child discontinued treatment after only 1 dose because of palatability and the other after 4 days due to a drug-related rash. No clinically significant laboratory abnormalities or liver-related toxicities were observed (Jonas, 2021).  This regimen was approved for use in children 3 to < 12 years of age in 2021. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 9 of 11 HCV in Children Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Given its pangenotypic activity, safety, and efficacy record in adult patients, glecaprevir/pibrentasvir is recommended as a first choice for pediatric and adolescent HCV treatment. As in adults, coadministration of carbamazepine, efavirenz- containing regimens, and St. John’s wort is not recommended since these compounds may decrease concentrations of glecaprevir and pibrentasvir. Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir The efficacy of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir once daily for 12 weeks was evaluated in an open-label trial among 173 pediatric participants aged ≥6 years with genotype 1, 2, 3, 4, or 6 infection, without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis. Eighty- five percent of participants (147/173) were treatment naive and 15% (26/173) were treatment experienced. Overall SVR12 was ≥92% across genotypes (Jonas, 2019a). Among 102 adolescents aged 12 to <18 years, 78% (n=80) were treatment naive and 22% (n=22) were treatment experienced. The median age was 15 years (range 12 to 17 years); 51% were female. The genotype distribution among the participants was 74% genotype 1, 6% genotype 2, 12% genotype 3, 2% genotype 4, and 6% genotype 6. No adolescents had known cirrhosis. The majority (89%; 91/102) had been infected through vertical transmission. SVR12 rates were 93% in adolescents with genotype 1, 91% in those with genotype 3, and 100% in participants with genotype 2, 4, or 6. One participant discontinued treatment at week 4 and subsequently relapsed. The other 4 participants who did not achieve SVR12 did not meet virologic failure criteria (lost to follow-up). Among 71 children aged 6 to <12 years, the genotype distribution was 76% genotype 1, 3% genotype 2, 15% genotype 3, and 6% genotype 4. None of the participants had known cirrhosis. Ninety-four percent (n=67) were treatment naive and 6% (n=4) 4 were treatment experienced. The median age was 8 years (range 6 to 11 years); 54% were female. The majority of children (94%; 67/71) had been infected through vertical transmission. SVR12 rates were 93% (50/54) in children with genotype 1, 91% (10/11) in those with genotype 3, and 100% in participants with genotype 2 (2/2) or genotype 4 (4/4). One participant had on-treatment virologic failure; the other 4 participants who did not achieve SVR12 did not meet virologic failure criteria (lost to follow-up). Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir was approved by the FDA for pediatric patients aged ≥6 years in March 2020 and for children 3 to < 6 years of age in June 2021. Given its pangenotypic activity, safety, and efficacy, sofosbuvir/velpatasvir is recommended as a first choice for HCV treatment in children and adolescents. Due to reports from experience among adults, coadministration of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir with amiodarone is not recommended due to the risk for symptomatic bradycardia. Ledipasvir/Sofosbuvir Ledipasvir/sofosbuvir is approved for use in children aged 3 through 17 years with genotype 1, 4, 5, or 6 infection. In a phase 2, multicenter, open-label study of 100 adolescents with genotype 1 treated for 12 weeks with the adult formulation of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir, SVR12 was documented in 98% of participants (Balistreri, 2017). The 2 patients who did not achieve SVR12 were lost to follow-up during or after treatment. Eighty percent of the patients were treatment naive. One patient had cirrhosis, 42 did not, and the cirrhosis status was unknown in the remaining 57. The regimen was safe and well tolerated in this population, and the adult dosage formulation resulted in pharmacokinetic characteristics similar to those observed in adults. Two clinical trials supporting the approval of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir in the pediatric population aged 3 through 11 years demonstrated high SVR12 rates comparable to those seen in adults (Schwarz, 2019); (Murray, 2018). Among children <12 years of age, dosing is weight based (see Table 1). Twelve weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir is recommended for treatment-naive children and adolescents aged ≥3 years without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis (Child-Pugh A). This regimen is also recommended for interferon-experienced (± ribavirin, with or without an HCV protease inhibitor) children and adolescents aged ≥3 years with genotype 1 or 4. A 12-week course is recommended for patients without cirrhosis; 24 weeks is recommended for those with compensated cirrhosis. Sofosbuvir Plus Ribavirin In September 2019, the FDA approved weight-based sofosbuvir plus ribavirin (see Table 4) for treatment-naive or HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 10 of 11 HCV in Children Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) interferon-experienced (± ribavirin) children aged ≥3 years with genotype 2 or 3, without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis (Child-Pugh A). This regimen is no longer favored because pangenotypic ribavirin-free treatments are now available for children as young as 3 years of age. Last update: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 11 of 11 Management of Key Populations With Chronic HCV Infection Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Management of Key Populations With Chronic HCV Infection People who inject drugs (PWID), men who have sex with men (MSM), and individuals in jails and prisons bear a particularly high burden of chronic HCV infection. Injection drug use accounts for the majority of new HCV infections, and the rising opioid epidemic has become an important force in the perpetuation of the HCV epidemic. Acute HCV infection is also increasingly being reported among HIV-infected and -uninfected MSM due to a variety of risk factors. Finally, HCV infection disproportionately affects individuals in correctional institutions, where the prevalence of infection ranges from 17% to 23% (Varan, 2014); (Edlin, 2015), far exceeding the 1.0% prevalence in the general population (Denniston, 2014). More than 90% of these individuals are ultimately released and re-enter the general population, where they can contribute to HCV transmission and develop liver-related and extrahepatic complications (Macalino, 2004); (Rich, 2014). Achieving the goal of HCV elimination will depend on diagnosing HCV and treating HCV infection in these groups, and implementing harm reduction strategies to prevent future infections. As a result, the panel has chosen to focus attention on HCV management among these key populations to reduce HCV transmission and decrease HCV-related morbidity and mortality. The first subsection of the key populations guidance focuses on recommendations for HCV testing, treatment, and harm reduction among PWID. The second subsection focuses on testing, treatment, and prevention of HCV among MSM. The final subsection provides recommendations for screening and treatment of HCV in jail and prison settings. Chronic HCV cannot be eliminated without implementation of strategies to reach these populations, and the recommendations in these subsections provide guidance in this effort. The following subsections include guidance for management of patients with HCV in key populations. Key Populations: Identification and Management of HCV in People Who Inject Drugs HCV in Key Populations: Men Who Have Sex With Men HCV Testing and Treatment in Correctional Settings Last update: November 6, 2019 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 1 Key Populations: Identification and Management of HCV in People Wh Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Key Populations: Identification and Management of HCV in People Who Inject Drugs Prevalence of HCV Among People Who Inject Drugs Injection drug use (IDU) is the most common risk factor for HCV infection in North America and Europe, with an HCV seroprevalence of 18% to 88% depending on geographic location (Degenhardt, 2017) and duration of IDU exposure (Mateu-Gelabert, 2022); (Amon, 2008). In this section, the term people who inject drugs (PWID) includes individuals who are actively using drugs and those who have previously used injection drugs. The first few years after an individual begins to inject drugs constitute a high-risk period during which the rate of HCV infection can exceed 40% (Maher, 2006). According to the National Survey on Drug Use and Health, heroin use has increased across the US among men and women, most age groups, and all income levels (Jones, 2015). IDU accounts for the majority of new HCV infections (approximately 70%) and is the driving force in the perpetuation of the epidemic. Given these facts and the absence of a vaccine against HCV, testing and linkage to care combined with antiviral treatment have the potential to decrease HCV incidence and prevalence (NAS, 2017); (Martin, 2013). Recommendations for Screening and Treatment of HCV Infection in People Who Inject Drugs (PWID) RECOMMENDED RATING Annual HCV testing is recommended for PWID with no prior testing, or past negative testing and subsequent injection drug use. Depending on the level of risk, more frequent testing may be indicated. IIa, C Substance use disorder treatment programs and needle/syringe exchange programs should offer routine, opt-out HCV-antibody testing with reflexive or immediate confirmatory HCV-RNA testing and linkage to care for those who are infected. IIa, C PWID should be counseled about measures to reduce the risk of HCV transmission to others. I, C PWID should be offered linkage to harm reduction services including intranasal naloxone, needle/syringe service programs, medications for opioid use disorder, and other substance use disorder treatment programs. I, B Active or recent drug use or a concern for reinfection is not a contraindication to HCV treatment. IIa, B HCV Testing Among PWID All individuals who currently inject drugs or have previously used injection drugs should be tested for HCV infection. Data HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 5 Key Populations: Identification and Management of HCV in People Wh Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) are limited regarding the optimal interval for repeat testing among individuals actively using drugs. An HCV-antibody test is recommended and if the result is positive, current infection should be confirmed by immediate HCV-RNA testing (see HCV Testing and Linkage to Care). This can be accomplished using phlebotomy for a combined reflex test performed by a laboratory, which is appropriate for clinical settings. In certain community settings, a point-of-care antibody test with an immediate blood draw or dried blood spot collection for a confirmatory HCV-RNA test may be implemented. Among persons at risk for HCV reinfection after previous spontaneous or treatment-related viral clearance, HCV-RNA testing is recommended because an HCV-antibody test is expected to remain positive. Among persons with a negative HCV-antibody test who are at high risk for a new HCV infection due to current IDU, testing for HCV RNA or follow-up testing for HCV antibody is recommended if HCV exposure may have occurred within the past 6 months. Integration of HCV testing services into substance use disorder treatment programs, needle/syringe service programs, and acute detoxification programs provide an opportunity for routine screening in this key population (Aronson, 2017); (Harris, 2010). Linkage to HCV Care and Treatment Adherence Treatment of HCV-infected PWID should ideally be delivered in a multidisciplinary care setting with services to reduce reinfection risk and manage the common social and psychiatric comorbidities in this population. Regardless of the treatment setting, recent and active IDU are not absolute contraindications to HCV therapy. There is strong evidence from various settings in which PWID have demonstrated adherence to treatment and low rates of reinfection, countering arguments that have been commonly used to limit HCV therapy access in this patient population (Coffin, 2019); (Dore, 2016); (Hellard, 2014); (Aspinall, 2013); (Grebely, 2011). Modeling studies illustrate the high return on the modest investment of addressing this often-ignored segment of the HCV-infected population (Barbosa, 2019); (Fraser, 2018b); (Zelenev, 2018); (Martin, 2013b). Conversely, there are no data to support the utility of pretreatment screening for illicit drug or alcohol use in identifying a population more likely to successfully complete HCV therapy. These requirements should be abandoned because they create barriers to treatment, add unnecessary cost and effort, miss an opportunity to decrease HCV transmission, and potentially exclude populations that are likely to obtain substantial benefit from therapy. Instead, scaling up HCV treatment in PWID is necessary to positively impact the HCV epidemic in the US and globally. Recent hepatitis C test-and-link programs have identified the use of patient navigators or care coordinators to be an important intervention in overcoming challenges to linkage to and retention in care (Coyle, 2019); (Ford, 2017); (Coyle, 2016); (Ramirez, 2016); (Coyle, 2015); (Trooskin, 2015). The Check Hep C program in New York City compared services delivered at 2 clinical care sites to 2 sites that linked patients to off-site care. Participants receiving clinical care co-located with testing services had higher odds of initiating treatment than those linked to off-site care (Ford, 2017). Ongoing assessment of efficacy and comparative effectiveness of this and additional strategies is a crucial area of future research for patients with chronic HCV. Replication and expansion of best practices and new models for linkage to HCV care will be essential to maximize the public health impact of newer HCV treatment paradigms. HCV Treatment Among PWID Clinical trials among PWID reporting current IDU at the start of HCV treatment and/or continued use during therapy demonstrate SVR12 rates approaching 95% (Grebely, 2018); (Dore, 2016). Moreover, high SVR rates among PWID are not limited to clinical trials but are also observed in clinical practice settings. A cohort study was conducted with 89 patients initiating HCV treatment between January 2014 and August 2015 at a primary care clinic in the Bronx, New York. Four patient groups were compared: no active drug use or medications for opioid use disorder (MOUDs); no active drug use with MOUDs; active drug use without MOUDs; and active drug use MOUDs. The study found that regardless of active drug or MOUD use, patients who received direct-acting antiviral (DAA) therapy at this urban primary care clinic achieved high HCV cure rates (SVR ≥95%) (Norton, 2017). Dispensing DAA therapy within a program that provides MOUDs increases the likelihood of PWID engagement in HCV treatment (Falade-Nwulia, 2019). Importantly, MOUDs do not compromise HCV treatment outcomes. Similar SVR12 rates HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 5 Key Populations: Identification and Management of HCV in People Wh Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) are achieved by PWID engaged in MOUD use compared with individuals not engaged with such medications in clinical trials and cohort studies of various DAA regimens (Macías, 2019); (Dore, 2016); (Grebely, 2016); (Lalezari, 2015); (Zeuzem, 2015); (Feld, 2014). HCV-infected patients receiving MOUDs who were treated with elbasvir/grazoprevir had high rates of adherence to antiviral treatment and SVR12 rates >89% regardless of ongoing IDU (Dore, 2016). Similarly, an SVR12 of 97.4% was reported in a clinical trial evaluating ombitasvir/paritaprevir/ritonavir plus dasabuvir and ribavirin for 12 weeks among patients receiving MOUDs (Lalezari, 2015). Further, an analysis of a clinical trial evaluating outcomes of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir treatment in patients receiving MOUDs (n=51) compared to those not receiving these medications (n=984) demonstrated that MOUD use did not significantly reduce treatment completion, antiviral adherence, SVR12, or safety (Grebely, 2016). Optimal models of HCV treatment among patients receiving MOUDs are still being evaluated. A recent trial conducted among PWID receiving MOUDs within 3 New York programs suggested that directly observed DAA therapy was associated with greater antiviral adherence than self-administered individual DAA treatment (86% versus 75%; p=0.001) (Akiyama, 2019). Importantly, opioid IDU and sharing has been observed to decrease following DAA HCV treatment (Artenie, 2020). Recommendation for Testing for Reinfection in People Who Inject Drugs (PWID) RECOMMENDED RATING At least annual HCV-RNA testing is recommended for PWID with recent injection drug use after they have spontaneously cleared HCV infection or have been successfully treated. IIa, C Reinfection As HCV therapy is expanded to populations of PWID with high-risk behaviors for re-exposure, acknowledgement that HCV reinfection will occur in some individuals is critical, and appropriate strategies must be in place to maximize prevention of reinfection and offer retreatment for reinfection (Grebely, 2017). Importantly, the rate of HCV reinfection in the PWID population is lower (2.4/100 person-years) than the rate of incident HCV infection in the general population of PWID (6.1 to 27.2/100 person-years), although the rate of reinfection increases with active or ongoing IDU (up to 7.4/100 person-years) (Akiyama, 2019b); (Aspinall, 2013); (Grady, 2013). Data suggest that reinfection is rare in drug users who clear HCV with therapy even if they continue to inject drugs provided steps are taken to minimize the risk. Studies of HCV reinfection in PWID have demonstrated rates of reinfection post SVR ranging from 1 to 5/100 person-years in patients who have ever injected drugs, increasing to 3 to 33/100 person- years in patients with continued injecting risk behavior (Midgard, 2016b); (Marco, 2013); (Grady, 2012); (Grebely, 2012); (Bate, 2010); (Grebely, 2010); (Currie, 2008); (Dalgard, 2002). Relapse into drug use has been associated with HCV reinfection after cure (Midgard, 2016b) while interventions that reduce drug use, such as utilization of MOUDs and mental health services, have been associated with reduced HCV reinfection risk (Islam, 2017). These services should be made available to PWID. PWID found to be HCV reinfected should be retreated. Retreatment of a new reinfection should be as detailed in the Initial Treatment section. Increasing the HCV treatment rate among the PWID population would reduce numbers of new HCV and liver-related disease cases (Jiang, 2017). In a study that evaluated reinfection and injecting risk behavior following DAA therapy, participants on MOUDs for ≥3 months had a reinfection rate of 2.3/100 person-years, with a persistent reinfection rate of 1.6/100 person-years due to spontaneous HCV clearance in several instances. A reinfection rate of 4.2/100 person-years was found among those who reported IDU (Dore, 2017). Harm Reduction HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 5 Key Populations: Identification and Management of HCV in People Wh Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Harm reduction is a way of preventing disease and promoting health that meets people where they are, and provides the tools and information they need to keep themselves and those around them well (Logan, 2010). Harm reduction places drug use within the larger sociopolitical spheres of poverty, criminalization, and mental health. Accepting that not everyone is ready or able to curtail or stop high-risk behavior, harm reduction focuses on promoting a spectrum of scientifically proven, practical strategies for reducing the negative consequences of drug use and other high-risk behaviors. Harm reduction strategies include but are not limited to condom distribution; access to sterile injection equipment; utilization of MOUDs (such as methadone, buprenorphine and naltrexone); safe injection spaces; and overdose education and naloxone distribution. Heroin overdose deaths in the US increased 286% from 2002 to 2013 (Jones, 2015). Broad implementation of harm reduction strategies has the potential to significantly impact the HCV epidemic. Medications for Opioid Use Disorder Methadone, buprenorphine, and naltrexone are FDA-approved treatments for opioid use disorder with evidence from randomized controlled trials and real-world cohorts to support their effectiveness in reducing opioid use, improving mortality, decreasing criminal activity, and improving social functioning and retention in care (Tasillo, 2017); (Kampman 2015); (Volkow, 2014). Methadone is a long-acting opioid agonist that has the longest history in clinical use and is proven to reduce illicit drug use and improve social functioning (Mattick, 2009). Although methadone is effective, concern about diversion leads to methadone maintenance being highly regulated in the US, typically requiring daily visits to a dedicated dispensing clinic (Mattick, 2014). Buprenorphine-naloxone is a partial opioid agonist that also relieves withdrawal, and quells opioid craving. Multiple randomized trials support its effectiveness in reducing drug use and improving retention in care (Tasillo, 2017); (Volkow, 2017); (Kampman, 2015); (Volkow, 2014); (Mattick, 2014); (Moore, 2012); (Weiss, 2011); (Comer, 2010); (Jones, 2010); (Ling, 2010); (Lucas, 2010); (Mattick, 2009); (Kakko, 2007); (Fischer, 2006); (Jones, 2005 ); (Fudala, 2003); (Kakko, 2003); (Johnson, 2000); (Ling, 1998); (O’Connor, 1998); (Ling, 1996); (Johnson,1995). Buprenorphine-naloxone’s major benefits include that it is a partial agonist which limits its overdose risk; coformulation with naloxone provides a deterrent from injecting; and it can be successfully prescribed in routine primary care settings (Korthuis, 2017); (LaBelle, 2016); (Fudala, 2003). Prescribing buprenorphine-naloxone requires 8 hours of training and registration with the US Drug Enforcement Agency and receiving a waiver from the Substance Abuse Mental Health Services Administration, which limits the number of providers (Stein, 2015). Naltrexone is an opioid antagonist that prevents the euphoric and respiratory effects of opioids, reducing cravings (SAMHSA, 2020). Naltrexone has low diversion potential and requires no special licensing for prescribers (Rudd, 2016). Further, it is available as a monthly injection. Naltrexone precipitates opioid withdrawal, however, and is therefore only initiated in opioid-abstinent patients. Several reviews have identified MOUDs as effective in reducing illicit opioid use (Mattick, 2014); (Mattick, 2009) and opioid-related death and all-cause mortality (Sordo, 2017); (Degenhardt, 2009), and improving quality of life (Lawrinson, 2008); (Ward, 1999). Participation in methadone maintenance treatment has been shown to be protective against hepatitis C incidence among PWID, with a dose-response protective effect with increasing methadone exposure on hepatitis C incidence (Nolan, 2014). Syringe Service Programs Syringe service programs (SSPs) were developed to reduce the spread of bloodborne diseases among injection drug users. These programs provide PWID with sterile syringes and other equipment (cookers, filters, sterile water, alcohol swabs) to reduce the risk of bloodborne disease (eg, HIV and HCV) transmission associated with sharing injection equipment. These programs were developed in the 1980s and often include drug treatment referrals, peer education, and HIV prevention. Areas with greater syringe access through SSPs have lower rates of hepatitis C among PWID. A prospective study of PWID in New York City found a significant decline in HCV rates from 1990 to 2001, corresponding to an increase in the number of syringes distributed by SSPs during this period (Des Jarlais, 2005). Overdose Education and Naloxone Distribution (OEND) HCV treatment is a touchpoint with the care delivery system and should be used as an opportunity to mitigate the harms of drug use, especially overdose risk. Naloxone is a powerful opioid antagonist that reverses the respiratory depressive effects of opioids and is lifesaving to those experiencing opioid overdose (Wermeling, 2015). Expanding access to intranasal naloxone significantly decreases mortality at the community level (Walley, 2013). Many states have standing orders for intranasal naloxone, which allow providers to dispense naloxone directly to patients. When no standing order HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 4 of 5 Key Populations: Identification and Management of HCV in People Wh Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) exists or when it is not feasible to provide naloxone directly, providers should offer patients a prescription for naloxone to fill at a local pharmacy. Importantly, naloxone is not an opioid and carries no overdose risk, no dependency risk, and no risk of diversion. Naloxone is safe and effective and can be prescribed with confidence by HCV providers who do not treat addictions more generally. Benefit of Treatment to Reduce HCV Transmission Persons cured of chronic HCV no longer transmit the virus to others. As such, successful HCV treatment benefits public health. Several health models have shown that even modest increases in successful HCV treatment among PWID can decrease prevalence and incidence (Hellard, 2014); (Martin, 2013); (Martin, 2013b); (Durier, 2012). Models developed to estimate the impact of HCV testing and treatment on the burden of HCV at a country level reveal that large decreases in HCV prevalence and incidence are possible as more persons are successfully treated (Martin, 2015); (Wedemeyer, 2014 ). Elimination of HCV among PWID will also require scaling up harm reduction services (Fraser, 2018). Last reviewed: December 19, 2023 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 5 of 5 HCV in Key Populations: Men Who Have Sex With Men Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) HCV in Key Populations: Men Who Have Sex With Men Incidence and Risk Factors for HCV Infection Among HIV-Infected Men Who Have Sex With Men Several outbreaks of sexually transmitted HCV infection among HIV-infected men who have sex with men (MSM) have been reported since 2000 (Wandeler, 2012); (van de Laar, 2010); (Urbanus, 2009); (Matthews, 2007). A recent systematic review reported an HCV incidence of 6.35/1000 person-years among HIV-infected MSM (Jin, 2017). The determinants of sexually transmitted, incident HCV among HIV-positive MSM have not been thoroughly characterized but risk factors have been identified. Group sex practices that can cause trauma to rectal mucosal tissue (eg, receptive anal intercourse without a condom and receptive fisting) and rectal bleeding are associated with HCV transmission among HIV- infected MSM (Daskalopoulou, 2017); (Page, 2016); (Apers, 2015); (Vanhommerig, 2015); (Witt, 2013); (Wandeler, 2012 ); (CDC, 2011); (Schmidt, 2011); (Danta, 2007). The recent proliferation of chemsex (also known as party and play [PNP])—use of crystal methamphetamine, mephedrone, or gamma-hydroxybutyrate, sometimes with phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors (which lowers inhibitions, creates feelings of invulnerability, increases stamina, and inhibits ejaculation) before or during sex—has also been associated with incident HCV infection (Pufall, 2018); (Hegazi, 2017); (NHS, 2014). These HCV infections have been occurring especially in men who already have ulcerative and rectal sexually transmitted infections including syphilis, lymphogranuloma venereum, and genital herpes (Bottieau, 2010); (van de Laar, 2007); (Gambotti, 2005); (Gotz, 2005); (Browne, 2004); (Ghosn, 2004). While it is not completely clear why higher rates of incident HCV have been reported in HIV-infected compared to uninfected MSM, behavioral factors such as serosorting (sex between partners of the same HIV status with the aim of minimizing HIV transmission risk) and increased rates of anal sex without condoms by HIV-infected men have been implicated (Mao, 2011). In a recent study of 33 HIV/HCV-coinfected MSM, one-third shed HCV in their semen (Turner, 2016). In addition to being found in semen, rectal shedding of HCV has also been reported in HIV/HCV-coinfected MSM (Foster, 2017b). Incidence and Risk Factors for HCV Infection Among HIV-Uninfected Men Who Have Sex With Men Acute HCV infections have been recently reported among HIV-uninfected MSM who present for pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) (Hoornenborg, 2017). These HIV-uninfected men became infected with HCV strains known to be circulating in HIV sexual transmission networks. Thus, there is growing concern that with the implementation of PrEP, high-risk HIV- uninfected MSM may be at increased risk of incident HCV through unprotected sexual intercourse with HCV-infected MSM. The risk factors for acute HCV infection in these patients remain unknown but may be similar to those reported in HIV-infected MSM. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 4 HCV in Key Populations: Men Who Have Sex With Men Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Testing Recommendations for Testing and Prevention of HCV Infection in Men Who Have Sex With Men (MSM) RECOMMENDED RATING Annual HCV testing is recommended for sexually active HIV-infected adolescent and adult MSM. Depending on the presence of high-risk sexual or drug use practices, more frequent testing may be warranted. IIa, C HCV testing at HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) initiation and at least annually thereafter (while on PrEP) is recommended in HIV-uninfected MSM. Depending on sexual or drug use risk practices, more frequent testing may be warranted. IIa, C All MSM should be counseled about the risk of sexual HCV transmission with high-risk sexual and drug use practices, and educated about measures to prevent HCV infection or transmission. IIa, C Screening for HCV Infection Among MSM Practitioners treating HIV-infected adolescent and adult MSM should be on high alert for acute HCV infection, which is most often asymptomatic (see the HCV in Children section). In accordance with US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) screening recommendations, HCV screening should be performed at least annually and may be done more frequently, depending on the presence of local and individual factors such as high HCV prevalence and/or incidence locally, high-risk sexual behavior (eg, unprotected [by a condom] receptive anal intercourse, group sex, fisting, chemsex), and ulcerative STD(s) or STD-related proctitis (Pufall, 2018); (Daskalopoulou, 2017); (Page, 2016); (Apers, 2015); (CDC, 2015); (Vanhommerig, 2015); (NHS, 2014); (Witt, 2013); (Wandeler, 2012); (CDC, 2011); (Schmidt, 2011); (Bottieau, 2010); (Danta, 2007); (van de Laar, 2007); (Gambotti, 2005); (Gotz, 2005); (Browne, 2004); (Ghosn, 2004). Screening should be performed using an HCV-antibody test in most instances. However, individuals with self-reported recent high-risk exposures and/or newly elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels should have HCV screening with both HCV-antibody and HCV-RNA tests due to concern for acute HCV infection. Those found to be chronically HCV infected should be offered antiviral treatment to prevent liver disease progression and transmission to others. These patients should also be counseled about risk factors for HCV transmission and the potential for HCV reinfection after cure (Ingiliz, 2017); (Ingiliz, 2014); (Lambers, 2011). Subsequent care for acute HCV should be as detailed in the Management of Acute HCV section. Prevention of HCV Infection To reduce the risk of sexually transmitted HCV and other STDs, MSM should be counseled to use condoms with all sex acts. They should also be informed about the high risk of HCV transmission associated with sharing any equipment used for preparing and injecting or snorting drugs. If indicated (and available), providers should offer referrals to syringe service programs and culturally competent counseling/drug treatment, and encourage patients to seek testing for sexually transmitted infections if they have been at risk. Among patients who are using opioids, discussion of preventing HCV infection is also an opportunity to provide opioid education and naloxone distribution (OEND), which is an effective intervention to prevent overdose death. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 4 HCV in Key Populations: Men Who Have Sex With Men Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Although PrEP can prevent sexual transmission of HIV, it is not protective against HCV or other sexually transmitted infections. HIV-uninfected MSM who present for PrEP should receive risk reduction counseling. HIV-uninfected MSM on PrEP should also receive at least annual HCV screening for identification of incident infections. Treatment Recommendation on Treatment of HCV in Men Who Have Sex With Men (MSM) RECOMMENDED RATING Antiviral treatment for HCV-infected MSM should be coupled with ongoing counseling about the risk of HCV reinfection, and education about methods to reduce HCV reinfection risk after cure. I, B Because MSM may be at high risk of transmitting HCV to others, HCV infection should be treated both for individual benefit and to prevent HCV transmission. HIV-infected MSM are considered an important population for HCV elimination through treatment as prevention (Martin, 2015). The population-level benefit of expansion of HCV treatment in populations of HIV-infected MSM has been evaluated in modeling studies (Martin, 2016); (Salazar-Vizcaya, 2016). Additionally, real- world data support the potential for HCV treatment as prevention in cohorts of HIV/HCV-coinfected MSM. Analysis of data from the Dutch acute HCV in HIV study group (DAHHS) showed a 50% reduction in acute HCV incidence between 2014 and 2016 within 1 year of expansion of HCV therapy through unrestricted direct-acting antiviral (DAA) availability to HIV- infected MSM (Boerekamps, 2017). HCV treatment should be coupled with education addressing the potential for HCV reinfection and risk factors for transmission to reduce the risk of transmission to others and subsequent reinfection after HCV cure. Brief counseling interventions delivered in clinical settings have been shown to reduce HIV transmission risk and may be effective in reducing HCV transmission risk (Boerekamps, 2017); (Myers, 2010); (Richardson, 2004). Testing for HCV Reinfection Recommendation on Prevention of HCV Reinfection in Men Who Have Sex With Men (MSM) RECOMMENDED RATING At least annual (and risk-based, if indicated) HCV testing with HCV RNA is recommended for sexually active MSM after successful treatment or spontaneous clearance of HCV infection. IIa, C High HCV reinfection rates, ranging from 7.3 to 15.2/100 person-years, have been reported after HCV treatment and cure among HIV-infected MSM (Ingiliz, 2017); (Martin, 2015b); (Lambers, 2011). In an analysis of 606 MSM from 8 centers in Europe, an increase in HCV reinfection incidence rates was reported with each subsequent reinfection (HCV reinfection HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 4 HCV in Key Populations: Men Who Have Sex With Men Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) incidence 7.3/100 person-years for the first reinfection and 18.8/100 person-years for the second reinfection) (Ingiliz, 2017 ). For this reason, it is important to provide patients with clear, nonjudgmental, accurate information about reducing their risk for sexually transmitted HCV. This counseling should be ongoing. Additionally, clinicians should monitor and test for HCV reinfection in sexually active MSM after cure, regardless of HIV status. Individuals found to be HCV reinfected should be retreated. HCV treatment in this setting should be as detailed in the Initial Treatment of HCV section. Last reviewed: October 24, 2022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 4 of 4 HCV Testing and Treatment in Correctional Settings Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) HCV Testing and Treatment in Correctional Settings Prevalence of HCV infection in Correctional Settings HCV infection disproportionately affects individuals in correctional institutions, which include jails (short-stay facilities that typically house persons for sentences of up to 1 year) and prisons (long-term facilities for persons with a felony conviction). Recent cross-sectional surveys suggest that HCV seroprevalence among incarcerated populations in the US ranges from 3.0% to 34.6% (Busschots, 2022), which exceeds the 1.7% HCV seroprevalence in the general population (Hofmeister, 2019). However, HCV prevalence in correctional populations is not geographically uniform and can vary by state and region (Varan, 2014). Injection drug use is the most common risk factor for HCV transmission in correctional settings (Ruiz, 1999); (Spaulding, 2006). HCV-associated liver disease is a frequent cause of death in inmates and has recently surpassed death from HIV (Spaulding, 2011); (Spaulding, 2015). Approximately 30% of all persons with HCV infection in the US spend at least part of the year in a correctional institution (Hammett, 2002); (Varan, 2014). Unfortunately, most HCV-infected individuals in correctional facilities are unaware of their infection (Spaulding, 2012). Given the high prevalence of HCV infection in correctional settings coupled with the fact that more than 10 million individuals pass through jails and prisons each year, as many as 1 million persons with undiagnosed HCV infection might come into contact with the correctional system each year (Spaulding, 2012); (Rich, 2014). More than 90% of these individuals are eventually released and re-enter the general population, where they can contribute to HCV spread in the community (Macalino, 2004); (Rich, 2014) and may have little contact with the healthcare system (Fox, 2005); (Bushway, 2006); (Rich, 2014b); (Neate, 2016). Moreover, 68% of prisoners are reincarcerated for a new crime within 3 years of their release from prison (Durose, 2014). Recidivism can further promote the spread of HCV within correctional settings. Both the US Preventive Services Task Force and the World Health Organization recommend that all incarcerated persons undergo HCV testing (WHO, 2016); (Moyer, 2013b). Despite these recommendations and the high prevalence of HCV infection in correctional institutions, HCV testing is not universally performed in this setting. Current Approaches to HCV Testing and Treatment in Jails HCV testing and treatment have been historically uncommon in jails, primarily because of the short duration of incarceration and lack of available resources (Maurer, 2015). With approximately 11 million jail admissions annually (Minton, 2016), jails represent an important public health setting in which to test for HCV infection and treat persons with chronic HCV. Jails have also not had the resources and systems to enable continuation of community-initiated HCV therapy. If detainees are unable to continue HCV treatment while incarcerated in jail, the interruption in therapy will adversely affect the likelihood of achieving a cure and could promote development of viral resistance. Without systems to facilitate continuation of antiviral therapy, jails may interfere with community HCV treatment efforts and societal payers will suffer losses on investments. Current Approaches to HCV Testing and Treatment in Prisons The bulk of the evidence on current HCV testing and treatment in the prison setting is based on a 2015 national survey conducted by the American Correctional Association and the Coalition of Correctional Health Authorities research and health outcomes working group (Maurer, 2015). According to this survey, some type of HCV testing is performed in the majority of prisons but routine opt-out testing is generally not conducted across the prison system. Additionally, there are major differences in approaches to HCV testing and prevention counseling. The most common triggers for HCV testing in HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 5 HCV Testing and Treatment in Correctional Settings Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) a prison setting were physician request, identified risk factors, and inmate request. Only 16% of prison facilities tested all inmates with an HCV-antibody test upon entry. Selection of patients for antiviral therapy also varied across prison systems. The survey found that antiviral therapy for chronic HCV was available in 90% of prisons. However, few inmates actually received treatment, primarily due to antiviral therapy expense and lack of availability of trained staff. Moreover, despite the fact that injection drug use was the major risk factor for HCV transmission in this population, only half of the prison facilities combined substance use disorder treatment with HCV therapy. More recently, investigators at Yale University administered a survey to the directors of the departments of corrections in all 50 US states that inquired about current HCV practices within state correctional facilities (Beckman, 2016). This survey included questions about the number of inmates in the state’s prisons known to be HCV infected on or about December 31, 2014; the number of prisoners receiving any form of HCV treatment at that time; and the availability of relevant resources for inmates with known HCV infection. Representatives from 41 states completed the questions on the number of inmates with chronic HCV infection and the proportion receiving antiviral treatment. The overall number of inmates who were reported to have chronic HCV in the 41 reporting states was 106,266 prisoners, corresponding to 10% of the overall prison population in these states. Among these inmates, only 0.89% (n=949) received any form of HCV treatment on or about December 31, 2014. States used a variety of factors to prioritize HCV treatment among inmates, particularly cirrhosis, sentence length, likelihood of recidivism, potential for antiviral adherence, and chance of HCV reinfection. States with a relatively high proportion of inmates reported to have HCV infection did not treat a greater number of patients than states with a lower proportion of infections. Representatives from 49 of the state departments of corrections completed the questions on resources related to HCV infection. Seventeen states reported offering routine opt-out HCV testing of inmates. Among the 32 states without routine opt-out HCV testing, the main indications for HCV testing were abnormal results from other tests, HIV infection, or a substance use disorder. Medication-assisted treatment programs for substance use disorders were available through 14 state departments of corrections. Four states reported that they followed all of the Federal Bureau of Prisons guidelines (FBP, 2016). Increased HCV Testing and Treatment in Correctional Institutions Will Aid HCV Elimination Given the high prevalence of HCV among persons in the US correctional system, the success of the national HCV elimination effort will depend on identifying chronically infected individuals in jails and prisons, linking these persons to medical care for management, and providing access to antiviral treatment (NAS, 2017). Diagnosis of chronic HCV in correctional settings followed by linkage to care and successful antiviral treatment can ultimately reduce the risk of liver- related and extrahepatic complications, and has the potential to decrease HCV transmission in correctional facilities and the community after release (van der Meer, 2012); (Harris, 2016); (He, 2016). Recommendations for Screening and Treatment of HCV Infection in Jails RECOMMENDED RATING Jails should implement opt-out HCV testing consisting of HCV-antibody testing followed by confirmatory HCV-RNA testing if antibody-positive. Chronically infected individuals should receive counseling about HCV infection and be provided linkage to follow-up community healthcare for evaluation of liver disease and treatment upon release. Chronically infected individuals whose jail sentence is sufficiently long to complete a recommended course of antiviral therapy should receive treatment for chronic HCV infection according to AASLD/IDSA guidance while incarcerated. Upon release, patients should be provided linkage to community healthcare for surveillance for HCV-related complications. IIa, C HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 5 HCV Testing and Treatment in Correctional Settings Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Recommendations for Screening and Treatment of HCV Infection in Prisons RECOMMENDED RATING Prisons should implement opt-out HCV testing. Chronically infected individuals should receive antiviral therapy according to AASLD/IDSA guidance while incarcerated. Upon release, patients should be provided linkage to community healthcare for surveillance for HCV-related complications. IIa, C To prevent HCV reinfection and reduce the risk of progression of HCV-associated liver disease, prisons should provide harm reduction and evidence-based treatment for underlying substance use disorders. IIa, C Recommendation for Continuation of HCV Treatment in Jail and Prison Settings RECOMMENDED RATING Jails and prisons should facilitate continuation of HCV therapy for individuals on treatment at the time of incarceration. IIa, C Opt-Out Testing for HCV Infection in Jails and Prisons Interventions to reduce HCV transmission and HCV-related liver disease can only be implemented if infected patients are diagnosed. Given the variable approaches to HCV testing across correctional facilities (Maurer, 2015), patients with chronic HCV in these settings may not have the opportunity to be diagnosed (Varan, 2014). Universal opt-out testing of inmates for chronic HCV is highly cost-effective and has been shown to reduce ongoing HCV transmission and the incidence of advanced liver disease (He, 2016). Based on a microsimulation model of HCV transmission and disease progression, this approach would enable diagnosis of 122,700 new HCV infections in prisons in the next 30 years; prevent 12,700 new HCV infections caused by release of infected inmates; and avert 11,700 liver-related deaths (He, 2016). In October 2016, the Federal Bureau of Prisons recommended an opt-out strategy of testing for HCV infection for all sentenced inmates (FBP, 2016). With this approach, an inmate is informed of the indications and plan for HCV testing, and the test is ordered and performed unless the inmate declines it. However, the Federal Bureau of Prisons clinical guidelines state that HCV testing is not required by policy or law. Thus, it is unclear if prisons are conforming to these recommendations. HCV-infected individuals in jails frequently cycle in and out of this setting, are unaware of their infection, and can contribute to HCV transmission in the community (Rich, 2014). Therefore, providing opt-out HCV testing in jails followed by linkage to community healthcare providers for those found to be infected is an advantageous approach to HCV case finding in these settings. A recent prospective cohort study evaluated an HCV testing and linkage-to-care program implemented in selected jails in North Carolina and South Carolina from December 2012 to March 2014 (Schoenbachler, 2016). HCV testing and linkage-to-care services were conducted by noncorrectional staff in parallel with correctional healthcare staff. Forty-eight percent of detainees with chronic HCV who were referred for management after release attended a follow-up appointment. Similar programs have been established in New York (Akiyama, 2016), Texas (de la Flor, 2017), and Rhode Island (Beckwith, 2016) with the latter using rapid, point-of-care HCV-antibody testing. These studies demonstrate the feasibility of HCV testing in jails followed by linkage to medical care after release for those who are chronically infected. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 5 HCV Testing and Treatment in Correctional Settings Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) HCV DAA Treatment in Jails A recent observational cohort study demonstrated the feasibility of initiating and completing direct-acting antiviral (DAA) HCV treatment in a jail setting (MacDonald, 2017). In this study, 104 detainees in the New York City jail system received DAA treatment between January 1, 2014 and June 30, 2016, of whom 60% (n=62) entered the jail on DAA therapy and 40% (n=42) initiated DAA treatment in jail. HCV viral loads were undetectable in 94% of community-initiated patients and 97% of jail-initiated patients. This study provides evidence that jail-based initiation of HCV treatment is feasible and prompt access to DAAs in jail can preserve the effectiveness of community-initiated HCV regimens. HCV DAA Treatment in Prisons HCV DAA therapy for chronic HCV is now logistically feasible within the prison setting and would aid the HCV elimination effort (Spaulding, 2013). The availability of all-oral DAA regimens that commonly require no more than 12 weeks of therapy and cause few adverse effects overcomes many of the logistical challenges associated with interferon-based HCV treatment (Spaulding, 2013). Directly observed therapy is the norm in prison settings, and the risk of drug diversion is low. Returning inmates to their communities cured of chronic HCV would be an invaluable step toward HCV elimination. In addition to these clinical benefits, treating chronic HCV in incarcerated persons is cost-effective. A recent analysis found that sofosbuvir-based treatment for genotype 1 monoinfection met the benchmark for cost-effectiveness in terms of the benefits gained (Liu, 2014). Treatment of Substance Abuse Disorders Given that injection drug use is the major risk factor for initial HCV infection and reinfection, and because alcohol abuse/dependence is a major cofactor in HCV-related liver disease progression, treatment of concomitant substance use disorders along with HCV therapy is of major importance in the incarcerated population. The most effective way to prevent HCV transmission in people who inject drugs is to combine harm reduction strategies that improve the safety of injection (ie, needle/syringe exchange) with interventions that treat the underlying addiction, particularly medication-assisted treatment (MacNeil, 2011); (Volkow, 2014) (see Identification and Management of HCV in People Who Inject Drugs). Alcohol prevention and treatment programs have not been given the same priority as those for drug addiction in correctional settings, and access to treatment for alcohol abuse/dependence after release is often limited. Addressing hazardous alcohol use among inmates with chronic HCV could help slow liver disease progression, decrease HCV transmission, and might reduce recidivism. However, according to the 2015 survey by the American Corrections Association (Maurer, 2015), slightly more than half of correctional systems treat the fundamental substance use disorders among patients receiving HCV antiviral therapy. Overcoming Barriers to HCV Testing and Treatment in Correctional Settings To expand HCV testing and prevention counseling and increase access to HCV therapy in correctional institutions, it will be necessary to overcome several important barriers. First, appropriately trained staff are needed to screen inmates for HCV infection and, depending on the result, provide counseling on HCV prevention, linkage to care, and access to antiviral treatment. Offsite providers can assist in these endeavors but add expense and logistical complications. The use of telemedicine to link inmates to specialists has been shown to be effective for the evaluation and treatment of chronic HCV in underserved settings (Arora, 2011). The National Commission on Correctional Health Care supports telemedicine in corrections. However, only 30 of the 45 states responding to the 2016 National Survey of Prison Health Care reported using telemedicine (Maruschak, 2016). Second, unplanned transfers and releases could disrupt ongoing HCV treatment (Spaulding, 2013). Most state correctional facilities do not have a process in place to smoothly transition a patient receiving DAA treatment in a prison setting to continuing community-based care without a lapse in antiviral therapy. However, the New York State Hepatitis C Continuity Program demonstrated that it is possible to establish a network of community-based providers to facilitate continuation of HCV treatment without interruption after release (Klein, 2007). In this program, inmates who initiated HCV treatment in prison were transitioned to a community-based provider for completion of therapy after release. Inmates diagnosed with chronic HCV who remained untreated while incarcerated were referred to a community provider for HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 4 of 5 HCV Testing and Treatment in Correctional Settings Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) treatment evaluation after release. Finally, the costs of HCV testing and antiviral treatment in correctional facilities are also formidable barriers. Strategies for financing HCV treatment have been put forward by the National Academy of Medicine’s Committee for a National Strategy for the Elimination of Hepatitis B and C (NAS, 2017). These strategies might help overcome cost barriers to HCV testing and treatment in correctional settings. Addressing these barriers will help ensure that persons residing in jails and prisons can undergo HCV testing and be diagnosed; have access to HCV prevention counseling; and receive treatment for chronic HCV and underlying substance use disorders. Improving the diagnosis and management of HCV infection in correctional settings will greatly facilitate efforts to eliminate HCV infection in the US. Last reviewed: December 19, 2023 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 5 of 5 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) AASLD/IDSA HCV guidance panel. Hepatitis C guidance: AASLD-IDSA recommendations for testing, managing, and treating adults infected with hepatitis C virus. Hepatology. 2015;(62):932-954. AASLD/IDSA HCV guidance panel, Recommendations for testing, managing, and treating hepatitis C website. Published 2017. Accessed June 13, 2017 [Internet]. 2017. http://hcvguidelines.org/ AASLD/IDSA HCV guidance panel. Recommendations for testing, managing, and treating hepatitis C. Updated August 27, 2020. [Internet]. 2020 [cited August 27, 2020]. http://hcvguidelines.org/ AbbVie Inc. Viekira XR [package insert]. North Chicago, IL: AbbVie Inc; 2017. Abdel-Alem S, ElSharkawy AM, Fouad R, et al. Improvement of glycemic state among responders to sofosbuvir-based treatment regimens: single center experience. J Med Virol. 2017;89:2181-2187. Aberg JA, Gallant JE, Ghanem KG, Emmanuel P, Zingman BS, Horberg MA. Infectious Disease Society of America. Primary care guidelines for the management of persons infected with HIV: 2013 update by the HIV Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 2014;58(1):e1-34. Abergel A, Asselah T, Metivier S, Loustaud-Ratti V. Ledipasvir-sofosbuvir in patients with hepatitis C virus genotype 5 infection: an open-label, multicentre, single-arm, phase 2 study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2016;16(4):459-464. Abergel A, Metivier S, Samuel D, et al. Ledipasvir plus sofosbuvir for 12 weeks in patients with hepatitis C genotype 4 infection. Hepatology. 2016;64(4):1049-1056. Abergel A, Hezode C, Asselah T, et al. A phase 3, global, multicenter, open-label study to investigate the efficacy of elbasvir/grazoprevir fixed-dose combination for 8 weeks in treatment-naïve, HCV GT1b-infected patients, with non-severe fibrosis: STREAGER. The International Liver Congress. Paris, France; 2018. Afdhal NH, Zeuzem S, Kwo PY, Chojkier M, Gitlin N, Puoti M, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for untreated HCV genotype 1 infection. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(20):1889-1898. Afdhal NH, Reddy KR, Nelson DR, Lawitz EJ, Gordon SC, Schiff ER, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for previously treated HCV genotype 1 infection. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(16):1483-1493. Afdhal NH, Bacon BR, Patel K, Lawitz EJ, Gordon SC, Nelson DR, et al. Accuracy of fibroscan, compared with histology, in analysis of liver fibrosis in patients with hepatitis B or C: a United States multicenter study. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015;13(4):772-779. Agarwal K, Castells L, Mullhaupt B, et al. Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir for 12 weeks in genotype 1-4 HCV-infected liver transplant recipients. J Hepatol. 2018;69(3):603-607. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 1 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Agnello V, Chung RT, Kaplan LM. A role for hepatitis C virus infection in type II cryoglobulinemia. N Engl J Med. 1992;327(21):1490-1495. American College of Cardiology Foundation and American Heart Association, Inc. Methodology manual and policies from the ACCF/AHA task force on practice guidelines, Accessed June 13, 2019. 2010 . Akiyama MJ, Kaba F, Rosner Z, Alper H, Holzman RS, MacDonald R. Hepatitis C screening of the "birth cohort" (born 1945-1965) and younger inmates of New York City jails. Am J Public Health. 2016;106(7):1276-1277. Akiyama MJ, Norton BL, Arnsten JH, Agyemang L, Heo M, Litwin AH. Intensive models of hepatitis C care for people who inject drugs receiving opioid agonist therapy: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 2019;170(9):594-603. Akiyama MJ, Lipsey D, Heo M, et al. Low hepatitis C reinfection following direct-acting antiviral therapy among people who inject drugs on opioid agonist therapy. Clin Infect Dis. 2020;70(12):2695-2702. Allen SA, Spaulding AC, Osei AM, Taylor LE, Cabral AM, Rich JD. Treatment of chronic hepatitis C in a state correctional facility. Ann Intern Med. 2003;138(3):187-190. Allison RD, Tong X, Moorman AC, Ly KN, Rupp L, Xu F, et al. Increased incidence of cancer and cancer-related mortality among persons with chronic hepatitis C infection, 2006-2010. J Hepatol. 2015;63(4):822-828. Alonso S, Riveiro-Barciela M, Fernández I, Rincón D, Real Y, Llerena S, et al.. Effectiveness and safety of sofosbuvir- based regimens plus an NS5A inhibitor for patients with HCV genotype 3 infection and cirrhosis. Results of a multicenter real-life cohort. J Viral Hepat. 2017;24(4):304 - 311. Alter MJ, Kruszon-Moran D, Nainan OV, et al. The prevalence of hepatitis C virus infection in the United States, 1988 through 1994. N Engl J Med. 1999;341(8):556-562. Alter MJ, Kuhnert WL, Finelli L, Finelli L. Guidelines for laboratory testing and result reporting of antibody to hepatitis C virus. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2003;52(RR-3):1-13, 15. Altshuler PJ, Helmers MR, Schiazza AR, et al. HCV-positive allograft use in heart transplantation is associated with increased access to overdose donors and reduced waitlist mortality without compromising outcomes. J Card Fail [Internet]. 2022;28(1):32-41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cardfail.2021.07.007 Alvarez D, Dieterich D, Brau N, Moores L, Ball L, Sulkowski MS. Zidovudine use but not weight-based ribavirin dosing impacts anaemia during HCV treatment in HIV-infected persons. J Viral Hepat. 2006;13:683-689. Amon JJ, Garfein RS, Ahdieh-Grant L, Armstrong GL, Ouellet LJ, Latka MH, et al. Prevalence of hepatitis C virus infection among injection drug users in the United States, 1994-2004. Clin Infect Dis. 2008;46(12):1852-1858. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 2 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Andreone P, Colombo MG, Enejosa JV, Koksal I, Ferenci P, Maieron A, et al. ABT-450, ritonavir, ombitasvir, and dasabuvir achieves 97% and 100% sustained virologic response with or without ribavirin in treatment-experienced patients with HCV genotype 1b infection. Gastroenterology. 2014;147(2):359-365. Aniszewska M, Kowalik-Mikolajewska B, Pokorska-Spiewak M, Marczynska M. Anti-HCV testing as a basic standard of monitoring HCV mother-to-child infection: advantages and disadvantages of the method. Przegl Epidemiol. 2012;66:341-345. Ankrom W, Sanchez RI, Yee KL, et al. Investigation of pharmacokinetic interactions between doravirine and elbasvir- grazoprevir and ledipasvir-sofosbuvir. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2019;63(5):e02491-18. Apers L, Vanden-Berghe W, De Wit S, Kabeya K, Callens S, Buyze J, et al. Risk factors for HCV acquisition among HIV- positive MSM in Belgium. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2015;68(5):585-593. Aqel B, Wijarnpreecha K, Pungpapong S, et al. Outcomes following liver transplantation from HCV-seropositive donors to HCV-seronegative recipients. J Hepatol. 2021;74(4):873-880. Arai Y, Noda K, Enomoto N, Arai K, Yamada Y, Suzuki K, et al. A prospective study of hepatitis C virus infection after needlestick accidents. Liver. 1996;16(5):331-334. Arase Y, Suzuki F, Suzuki Y, Akuta N, Kobayashi M, Kawamura Y, et al. Sustained virological response reduces incidence of onset of type 2 diabetes in chronic hepatitis C. Hepatology. 2009;49(3):739-744. Araujo AC, Astrakhantseva IV, Fields HA, Kamili S. Distinguishing acute from chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection based on antibody reactivities to specific HCV structural and nonstructural proteins. J Clin Microbiol. 2011;49(1):54-57. Aronson I, Bennett A, Marsch LA, Bania TC. Mobile technology to increase HIV/HCV testing and overdose prevention/response among people who inject drugs. Front Public Health. 2017;5:217. Arora S, Thornton K, Murata G, Deming P, Kalishman S, Dion D, et al. Outcomes of treatment for hepatitis C virus infection by primary care providers. N Engl J Med. 2011;364(23):2199-2207. Artenie AA, Cunningham EB, Dore GJ, et al. Patterns of drug and alcohol use and injection equipment sharing among people with recent injection drug use or receiving opioid agonist treatment during and following hepatitis C virus treatment with direct-acting antiviral therapies [truncated]. Clin Infect Dis. 2020;70(11):2369-2376. Aspinall EJ, Corson S, Doyle JS, Grebely J, Hutchinson SJ, Dore GJ, et al. Treatment of hepatitis C virus infection among people who are actively injecting drugs: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Infect Dis. 2013;57(Suppl 2):S80-S89. Asselah T, Hassanien T, Qadish RB, al. et. A randomized, open-label study to evaluate efficacy and safety of ombitasvir/paritaprevir/ritonavir co-administered with ribavirin in adults with genotype 4 chronic hepatitis C infection and HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 3 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) cirrhosis. Journal of Hepatology. 2015;62(S861). Asselah T, Hezode C, Qaqish RB, Elkhashab M, Hassanein T, Papatheodoridis G, et al. Ombitasvir, paritaprevir, and ritonavir plus ribavirin in adults with hepatitis C virus genotype 4 infection and cirrhosis (AGATE-I): a multicentre, phase 3, randomised open-label trial. The Lancet Gastroenterology & Hepatology [Internet]. 2016;1(1):25 - 35. https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2468125316300012 Asselah T, Bourgeois S, Pianko S, Zeuzem S, Sulkowski M, Foster GR, et al. Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir in patients with hepatitis C virus genotypes 1-6 and compensated cirrhosis or advanced fibrosis. Liver Int. 2018;38(3):443-450. Asselah T, Kowdley KV, Zadeikis N, Wang S, Hassanein T, Horsmans Y, et al. Efficacy of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for 8 or 12 weeks in patients with hepatitis C virus genotype 2, 4, 5, or 6 infection without cirrhosis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2018;16(3):417-426. Asselah T, Kowdley KV, Zadeikis N, Wang S, Hassanein T, Horsmans Y, et al. Efficacy of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for 8 or 12 weeks in patients with hepatitis C virus genotype 2, 4, 5, or 6 infection without cirrhosis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2018;16(3):417-426. Asselah T, Reesink H, Gerstoft J, et al. Efficacy of elbasvir and grazoprevir in participants with hepatitis C virus genotype 4 infection: a pooled analysis. Liver Int. 2018;38(9):1583-1591. Asselah T, Lee SS, Yao BB, et al. Efficacy and safety of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in patients with chronic hepatitis C virus genotype 5 or 6 infection (ENDURANCE-5,6): an open-label, multicentre, phase 3b trial. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2019;4(1):45-51. Asselah T, Pol S, Hezode C, et al. Efficacy and safety of elbasvir/grazoprevir for 8 or 12 weeks for hepatitis C virus genotype 4 infection: a randomized study. Liver Int. 2020;40(5):1042-1051. Assoumou SA, Tasillo A, Leff JA, Schackman BR, Drainoni M-L, C. Horsburgh R, et al. Cost-effectiveness of one-time hepatitis C screening strategies among adolescents and young adults in primary care settings. Clin Infect Dis. 2018;66(3):376-384. Babatin MA, AlGhamdi AS, Assiri AM, et al. Treatment efficacy of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir for 8 weeks in non-cirrhotic chronic hepatitis C genotype 4 patients. Saudi J Gastroenterol. 2019;25(1):55-60. Backus LI, Boothroyd DB, Phillips BR, Belperio P, Halloran J, Mole LA. A sustained virologic response reduces risk of all- cause mortality in patients with hepatitis C. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011;9(6):509-516. Backus LI, Belperio PS, Shahoumian TA, Loomis TP, Mole LA. Real-world effectiveness and predictors of sustained virological response with all-oral therapy in 21,242 hepatitis C genotype-1 patients. Antivir Ther. 2017;22(6):481-493. Balistreri WF, Murray KF, Rosenthal P, Bansal S, Lin C-H, Kersey K, et al. The safety and effectiveness of ledipasvir- sofosbuvir in adolescents 12-17 years old with hepatitis C virus genotype 1 infection. Hepatology. 2017;66(2):371-378. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 4 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Barbosa C, Fraser H, Hoerger TJ, et al. Cost-effectiveness of scaling-up HCV prevention and treatment in the United States for people who inject drugs. Addiction. 2019;114(12):2267-2278. Bari K, Luckett K, Kaiser T, et al. Hepatitis C transmission from seropositive, nonviremic donors to non-hepatitis C liver transplant recipients. Hepatology. 2018;67(5):1673-1682. Barocas JA, Tasillo A, Eftekhari-Yazdi G, et al. Population-level outcomes and cost-effectiveness of expanding the recommendation for age-based hepatitis C testing in the United States. Clin Infect Dis. 2018;67(4):549-556. Barua S, Greenwald R, Grebely J, Dore GJ, Swan T, Taylor LE. Restrictions for Medicaid reimbursement of sofosbuvir for the treatment of hepatitis C virus infection in the United States. Ann Intern Med. 2015;163(3):215-223. Bate JP, Colman AJ, Frost PJ, Shaw DR, Harley HA. High prevalence of late relapse and reinfection in prisoners treated for chronic hepatitis C: relapse in prisoners treated for hepatitis C. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010;25(7):1276-1280. Beckman AL, Bilinski A, Boyko R, Camp GM, Wall AT, Lim JK, et al. New hepatitis C drugs are very costly and unavailable to many state prisoners. Health Aff (Millwood). 2016;35(10):1893-1901. Beckwith CG, Kurth AE, Bazerman LB, Patry EJ, Cates A, Tran L, et al. A pilot study of rapid hepatitis C virus testing in the Rhode Island Department of Corrections. J Public Health. 2016;38(1):130-137. Bedossa P, Dargère D, Paradis V. Sampling variability of liver fibrosis in chronic hepatitis C. Hepatology. 2003;38(6):1449-1457. Behairy B-S, Sira MM, Zalata KR, Salama el-SE, Abd-Allah MA. Transient elastography compared to liver biopsy and morphometry for predicting fibrosis in pediatric chronic liver disease: Does etiology matter?. World J Gastroenterol. 2016;22(16):4238-4249. Bellentani S, Pozzato G, Saccoccio G, Crovatto M, Croce LS, Mazzoran L, et al. Clinical course and risk factors of hepatitis C virus related liver disease in the general population: report from the Dionysos study. Gut. 1999;44(6):874-880. Belli LS, Berenguer M, ELITA , Cortesi PA, Strazzabosco M, Rockenschaub S-R, et al. Delisting of liver transplant candidates with chronic hepatitis C after viral eradication: a European study. J Hepatol. 2016;65(3):524-531. Belperio PS, Shahoumian TA, Loomis TP, Backus LI. Real-world effectiveness of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir in 573 direct-acting antiviral experienced hepatitis C patients. J Viral Hepat. 2019;26(8):980-990. Benhamou Y, Bochet M, Di Martino V, Charlotte F, Azria F, Coutellier A, et al. Liver fibrosis progression in human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C virus coinfected patients. The Multivirc group. Hepatology. 1999;30(4):1054-1058. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 5 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Benhamou Y, Di Martino V, Bochet M, Colombet G, Thibault V, Liou A, et al. Factors affecting liver fibrosis in human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C virus-coinfected patients: impact of protease inhibitor therapy. Hepatology. 2001;34(2):283-287. Benova L, Mohamoud YA, Calvert C, Abu-Raddad LJ. Vertical transmission of hepatitis C virus: systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Infect Dis. 2014;59(6):765-773. Berenguer M, Palau A, Aguilera V, Rayon JM, Juan FS, Prieto M. Clinical benefits of antiviral therapy in patients with recurrent hepatitis C following liver transplantation. Am J Transplant. 2008;8(3):679-687. Berenguer J, Álvarez-Pellicer J, Martin PM, Lopez-Aldeguer J, Von-Wichmann MA, Quereda C, et al.. Sustained virological response to interferon plus ribavirin reduces liver-related complications and mortality in patients coinfected with human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C virus. Hepatology. 2009;50(2):407-413. Berenguer M, Schuppan D. Progression of liver fibrosis in post-transplant hepatitis C: mechanisms, assessment and treatment. J Hepatol. 2013;58(5):1028-1041. Berg T, Naumann U, Stoehr A, et al. Real-world effectiveness and safety of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C infection: data from the German Hepatitis C-Registry. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2019;49(8):1052-1059. Bernhard B, Stickel F. Successful fourth line treatment of a relapse patient with chronic hepatitis C virus infection genotype 3a using sofosbuvir, glecaprevir/pibrentasvir, and ribavirin: a case report. Z Gastroenterol. 2020;58(5):451-455. Bersoff-Matcha SJ, Cao K, Jason M, Ajao A, S. Jones C, Meyer T, et al. Hepatitis B virus reactivation associated with direct-acting antiviral therapy for chronic hepatitis C virus: a review of cases reported to the US Food and Drug Administration adverse event reporting system. Ann Intern Med. 2017;166(11):792-798. Beste LA, Green PK, Berry K, Kogut MJ, Allison SK, Ioannou GN. Effectiveness of hepatitis C antiviral treatment in a USA cohort of veteran patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. J Hepatol. 2017;67(1):32-39. Beste LA, Glorioso TJ, Ho PM. Telemedicine specialty support promotes hepatitis C treatment by primary care providers in the Department of Veterans Affairs. Am J Med. 2017;130(4):432-438.e3. Bethea ED, Gaj K, Gustafson JL, et al. Pre-emptive pangenotypic direct acting antiviral therapy in donor HCV-positive to recipient HCV-negative heart transplantation: an open-label study. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2019;4:771-780. Bethea E, Arvind A, Gustafson J, et al. Immediate administration of antiviral therapy after transplantation of hepatitis C- infected livers into uninfected recipients: implications for therapeutic planning. Am J Transplant. 2020;20(6):1619-1628. Bhamidimarri KR, Ladino M, Pedraza F, et al. Transplantation of kidneys from hepatitis C-positive donors into hepatitis C virus-infected recipients followed by early initiation of direct acting antiviral therapy: a single-center retrospective study. Transpl Int. 2017;30:865-873. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 6 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Bhattacharya D, Belperio PS, Shahoumian TA, Loomis TP, Goetz MB, Mole LA, et al. Effectiveness of all-oral antiviral regimens in 996 human immunodeficiency virus/hepatitis C virus genotype 1-coinfected patients treated in routine practice. Clin Infect Dis. 2017;64(12):1711-1720. Bifano M, Hwang C, Oosterhuis B, Hartstra J, Grasela D, Tiessen R, et al. Assessment of pharmacokinetic interactions of the HCV NS5A replication complex inhibitor daclatasvir with antiretroviral agents: ritonavir-boosted atazanavir, efavirenz, and tenofovir. Antivir Ther. 2013;18(7):931-940. Bittermann T, Reddy KR. In the era of direct-acting antivirals, liver transplant delisting due to clinical improvement for hepatitis C remains infrequent. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020;S1542-3565(20):31294-5. Blackard JT, Shata MT, Shire NJ, Sherman KE. Acute hepatitis C virus infection: a chronic problem. Hepatology. 2008;47(1):321-331. Boaz K, Fiore AE, Schrag SJ, Gonik B, Schulkin J. Screening and counseling practices reported by obstetrician- gynecologists for patients with hepatitis C virus infection. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol. 2003;11(1):39-44. Bochud PY, Cai T, Overbeck K, Bochud M, Dufour JF, Mullhaupt B, et al. Genotype 3 is associated with accelerated fibrosis progression in chronic hepatitis C. J Hepatol. 2009;51(4):655-666. Boerekamps A, van den Berk GE, Lauw FN, Leyten EM, van Kasteren ME, van Eeden A, et al. Declining hepatitis C virus (HCV) incidence in Dutch human immunodeficiency virus-positive men who have sex with men after unrestricted access to HCV therapy. Clin Infect Dis. 2017;66(9):1360-1365. Boerekamps A, van den Berk GE, Lauw FN. Declining hepatitis C virus (HCV) incidence in Dutch human immunodeficiency virus-positive men who have sex with men after unrestricted access to HCV therapy. Clin Infect Dis. 2018;66(9):1360-1365. Boerekamps A, Vanwolleghem T, Van Der Valk M, et al. 8 weeks of sofosbuvir/ledipasvir is effective in DAA-naive non- cirrhotic HCV genotype 4 infected patients (HEPNED-001 study). J Hepatol. 2019;70(3):554-557. Boesecke C, Rockstroh JK. Acute hepatitis C in patients with HIV. Semin Liver Dis. 2012;32(2):130-137. Bohorquez H, Bugeaud E, Bzowej N, et al. Liver transplantation using hepatitis C virus-viremic donors into hepatitis C virus-aviremic recipients as standard of care. Liver Transpl. 2021;27(4):548-557. Bohorquez H, Velez JCQ, Lusco M, Scheuermann J, Cohen AJ. Hepatitis C-associated focal proliferative glomerulonephritis in an aviremic recipient of a hepatitis C-positive antibody donor liver. Am J Transplant. Bonder A, Afdhal NH. Utilization of FibroScan in clinical practice. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2014;16(2):372. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 7 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Bonkovsky HL, Snow KK, Malet PF, Back-Madruga C, Fontana RJ, Sterling RK, et al. Health-related quality of life in patients with chronic hepatitis C and advanced fibrosis. J Hepatol. 2007;46(3):420-431. Borgia SM, Dearden J, Lurie Y. Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir for 12 weeks is safe and effective in patients undergoing dialysis [LB-15]. The Liver Meeting. San Francisco, CA; 2018. Borgia SM, Dearden J, Yoshida EM, et al. Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir for 12 weeks in hepatitis C virus-infected patients with end-stage renal disease undergoing dialysis. J Hepatol. 2019;pii: S0168-8278(19):30343-5. Bortolotti F, Verucchi G, Camma C, et al. Long-term course of chronic hepatitis C in children: from viral clearance to end- stage liver disease. Gastroenterology. 2008;134:1900-1907. Boscarino JA, Lu M, Moorman AC, Gordon SC, Rupp LB, Spradling PR, et al. Predictors of poor mental and physical health status among patients with chronic hepatitis C infection: the chronic hepatitis cohort study (CHeCS). Hepatology. 2015;61(3):802-811. Bottieau E, Apers L, Van Esbroeck M, Vandenbruaene M, Florence E. Hepatitis C virus infection in HIV-infected men who have sex with men: sustained rising incidence in Antwerp, Belgium, 2001-2009. Euro Surveil. 2010;15(39):19673. Bourliere M, Bronowicki J, de Ledinghen V, Hézode C, Zoulim F, Mathurin P, et al.. Ledipasvir-sofosbuvir with or without ribavirin to treat patients with HCV genotype 1 infection and cirrhosis non-responsive to previous protease-inhibitor therapy: a randomised, double-blind, phase 2 trial (SIRIUS). Lancet Infect Dis. 2015;15(4):397-404. Bourliere M, Gordon SC, Flamm SL, Cooper CL, Ramji A, Tong M, et al. Sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir for previously treated HCV infection. N Engl J Med. 2017;376(22):2134-2146. Bourliere M, Gordon SC, Schiff ER, et al. Deferred treatment with sofosbuvir-velpatasvir-voxilaprevir for patients with chronic hepatitis C virus who were previously treated with an NS5A inhibitor: an open-label substudy of POLARIS-1. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2018;3(9):559-565. Bourne A, Reid D, Hickson F, Torres-Rueda S, Weatherburn P. Illicit drug use in sexual settings ('chemsex’) and HIV/STI transmission risk behaviour among gay men in South London: findings from a qualitative study. Sex Transm Infect. 2015;91(8):564–568. Boursier J, de Ledinghen V, Zarski JP, Fouchard-Hubert I, Gallois Y, Oberti F, et al. Comparison of eight diagnostic algorithms for liver fibrosis in hepatitis C: new algorithms are more precise and entirely noninvasive. Hepatology. 2012;55(1):58-67. Bowring MG, Kucirka LM, Massie AB, et al. Changes in utilization and discard of HCV antibody-positive deceased donor kidneys in the era of direct-acting antiviral therapy. Transplantation. 2018;102:2088-2095. Boyle A, Marra F, Peters E, et al. Eight weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir for genotype 3 hepatitis C in previously untreated patients with significant (F2/3) fibrosis. J Viral Hepat. 2020;27(4):371-375. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 8 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Brau N, Salvatore M, RÍos-Bedoya CF, Fernandez-Carbia A, Paronetto F, Rodriguez-Orengo JF, et al.. Slower fibrosis progression in HIV/HCV-coinfected patients with successful HIV suppression using antiretroviral therapy. J Hepatol. 2006;44(1):47-55. Braun DL, Hampel B, Nguyen H. A treatment as prevention trial to eliminate HCV in HIV+ MSM: the Swiss HCVree trial [abstract 81LB]. 25th Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections. Boston, MA; 2018. Braun DL, Hampel B, Kouyos R, et al. High cure rates with grazoprevir-elbasvir with or without ribavirin guided by genotypic resistance testing among human immunodeficiency virus/hepatitis C virus-coinfected men who have sex with men. Clin Infect Dis. 2019;68(4):569-576. Bravo MJ, Vallejo F, Barrio G, Brugal MT, Molist G, Pulido J, et al. HCV seroconversion among never-injecting heroin users at baseline: no predictors identified other than starting injection. Int J Drug Policy. 2012;23(5):415-419. Brooks KM, Castillo-Mancilla J, Morrow M, et al. Plasma and intracellular pk and renal safety of TAF 25mg with boosted PIs and LDV/SOF [abstract 449]. Presented at Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections. March 8-11, 2020. Boston, Massachusetts; 2020. Brooks KM, Castillo-Mancilla JR, Morrow M, et al. Pharmacokinetics and renal safety of tenofovir alafenamide with boosted protease inhibitors and ledipasvir/sofosbuvir. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2020;75(11):3303-3310. Brown RS, O'Leary JG, Reddy KR, Kuo A, Morelli GJ, Burton JR, et al. Interferon-free therapy for genotype 1 hepatitis C in liver transplant recipients: Real-world experience from the hepatitis C therapeutic registry and research network. Liver Transpl. 2016;22(1):24-33. Brown RS, Hezode C, Wang S, et al. Preliminary efficacy and safety of 8-week glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in patients with HCV genotype 1-6 infection and compensated cirrhosis: the EXPEDITION-8 study [Abstract LB-7]. The Liver Meeting. San Francisco, CA; 2018. Brown RS, Buti M, Rodrigues L, et al. Efficacy and safety of 8-week glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in treatment-naive patients with chronic hepatitis c virus genotype 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 infection and compensated cirrhosis: EXPEDITION-8 complete results [abstract LP9]. Presented at Liver Meeting, 2019; November 8-12. Boston, Massachusetts; 2019. Brown RS, Buti M, Rodrigues L, et al. Glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for 8 weeks in treatment-naïve patients with chronic HCV genotypes 1-6 and compensated cirrhosis: the EXPEDITION-8 trial. J Hepatol. 2020;72(3):441-449. Brown, Jr RS, Collins MA, Strasser SI, Emmett A, Topp AS, Burroughs M, et al. Efficacy and Safety of 8- or 12 Weeks of Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir in Patients with Evidence of Portal Hypertension. Infect Dis Ther [Internet]. 2022;11(2):913-924. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40121-022-00599-8 Browne R, Asboe D, Gilleece Y, Atkins M, Mandalia S, Gazzard B, et al. Increased numbers of acute hepatitis C infections in HIV positive homosexual men; is sexual transmission feeding the increase?. Sex Transm Infect. 2004;80(4):326-327. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 9 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Bruchfeld A, Roth D, Martin P, et al. Elbasvir plus grazoprevir in patients with hepatitis C virus infection and stage 4-5 chronic kidney disease: clinical, virological, and health-related quality-of-life outcomes from a phase 3, multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017;2(8):585-594. Bruggmann P, Litwin AH. Models of care for the management of hepatitis C virus among people who inject drugs: one size does not fit all. Clin Infect Dis. 2013;57(Suppl 2):S56-S61. Bruix J, Sherman M, AASLD . Management of hepatocellular carcinoma: an update. Hepatology. 2011;53(3):1020-1022. Bruneau J, Zang G, Abrahamowicz M, Jutras-Aswad D, Daniel M, Roy E. Sustained drug use changes after hepatitis C screening and counseling among recently infected persons who inject drugs: a longitudinal study. Clin Infect Dis. 2014;58(6):755-761. Burton MJ, Voluse AC, Anthony V. Integrating comprehensive hepatitis C virus care within a residential substance use disorder treatment program. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2019;(98):9-14. Bushway SD. The problem of prisoner (re)entry. Contemp Sociol. 2006;35(6):562-565. Busschots D, Kremer C, Bielen R, Bielen R. Hepatitis C prevalence in incarcerated settings between 2013–2021: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Public Health. 2022;22(1):2159. Butt AA, McGinnis K, Skanderson M, Justice AC. A comparison of treatment eligibility for hepatitis C virus in HCV- monoinfected versus HCV/HIV-coinfected persons in electronically retrieved cohort of HCV-infected veterans. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2011;27(9):973-979. Butt ZA, Wong S, Rossi C, et al. Concurrent hepatitis C and B virus and human immunodeficiency virus infections are associated with higher mortality risk illustrating the impact of syndemics on health outcomes. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2020;7(9):ofaa347. Canary LA, Klevens RM, Holmberg SD. Limited access to new hepatitis C virus treatment under state medicaid programs. Ann Intern Med. 2015;163(3):226-228. Cardona-Gonzalez MG, Goldman JD, Narayan L, Brainard DM, Kowdley KV. Sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir for treatment of recurrent hepatitis C virus infection after liver transplantation. Hepatol Commun. 2018;2(12):1446-1450. Carrat F, Fontaine H, Dorival C. Clinical outcomes in patients with chronic hepatitis C after direct-acting antiviral treatment: a prospective cohort study. Lancet. 2019;393(10179):1453-1464. Casiraghi MAntonietta, De Paschale M, Romanò L, Biffi R, Assi A, Binelli G, et al.. Long-term outcome (35 years) of hepatitis C after acquisition of infection through mini transfusions of blood given at birth. Hepatology. 2004;39(1):90-96. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 10 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Castera L, Vergniol J, Foucher J, Le BB, Chanteloup E, Haaser M, et al. Prospective comparison of transient elastography, Fibrotest, APRI, and liver biopsy for the assessment of fibrosis in chronic hepatitis C. Gastroenterology. 2005;128(2):343-350. Castera L, Sebastiani G, Le BB, de Ledinghen V, Couzigou P, Alberti A. Prospective comparison of two algorithms combining non-invasive methods for staging liver fibrosis in chronic hepatitis C. J Hepatol. 2010;52(2):191-198. Castera L. Noninvasive methods to assess liver disease in patients with hepatitis B or C. Gastroenterology. 2012;142(6):1293-1302. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Recommendations for prevention and control of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection and HCV-related chronic disease. MMWR Recomm Rep. 1998;47(RR-19):1-39. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Recommendations for preventing transmission of infections among chronic hemodialysis patients. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2001;50(RR-5):1-43. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Sexual transmission of hepatitis C virus among HIV-infected men who have sex with men--New York City, 2005-2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2011;60(28):945-950. Use of 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine and 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine for adults with immunocompromising conditions: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2012;61(40):816-819. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Testing for HCV infection: an update of guidance for clinicians and laboratorians. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2013;62(18):362-365. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2015 sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, special populations [Internet]. 2015 . https://www.cdc.gov/std/tg2015/specialpops.htm Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Viral hepatitis statistics and surveillance, hepatitis C. Updated 2016 [Internet]. 2016 [cited Accessed June 13, 2019]. https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/hcv/StatisticsHCV.htm US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Viral hepatitis surveillance—United States, 2017 [Internet]. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2019 . https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/statistics/2017surveillance/index.htm Ceci O, Margiotta M, Marello F, Francavilla R, Loizzi P, Francavilla A, et al. Vertical transmission of hepatitis C virus in a cohort of 2,447 HIV-seronegative pregnant women: a 24-month prospective study. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2001;33(5):570-575. Chahal HS, Marseille EA, Tice JA, Pearson SD, Ollendorf DA, Fox RK, et al. Cost-effectiveness of early treatment of hepatitis C virus genotype 1 by stage of liver fibrosis in a US treatment-naive population. JAMA Intern Med. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 11 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) 2016;176(1):65-73. Chaillon A, Rand EB, Reau N, Martin NK. Cost-effectiveness of universal hepatitis C virus screening of pregnant women in the United States. Clin Infect Dis. 2019;69(11):1888-1895. Chamot E, Hirschel B, Wintsch J, Robert CF, Gabriel V, Deglon JJ, et al. Loss of antibodies against hepatitis C virus in HIV-seropositive intravenous drug users. AIDS. 1990;4(12):1275-1277. Chappell CA, Krans EE, Bunge K, et al. A phase 1 study of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir in pregnant women with hepatitis C virus [abstract 87]. Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections. Seattle, WA; 2019. Chappell CA, Krans EE, Bunge K, et al. A phase 1 study of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir in pregnant women with hepatitis C virus [abstract 87]. Presented at the Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections; March 4-7. 2019. Chappell CA, Scarsi KK, Kirby BJ, Suri V, Gaggar A, Bogen DL, et al. Ledipasvir plus sofosbuvir in pregnant women with hepatitis C virus infection: a phase 1 pharmacokinetic study. Lancet Microbe [Internet]. 2020;1(5):e200–08. https://doi.org/10.1016/s2666-5247(20)30062-8 Charlton MR, Seaberg E, Wiesner R, Everhart J, Zetterman R, Lake J, et al. Predictors of patient and graft survival following liver transplantation for hepatitis C. Hepatology. 1998;28(3):823-830. Charlton MR, Gane EJ, Manns MP, Brown, Jr. RS, Curry MP, Kwo PY, et al. Sofosbuvir and ribavirin for treatment of compensated recurrent hepatitis C virus infection after liver transplantation. Gastroenterology. 2015;148(1):108-117. Charlton M, Everson GT, Flamm SL, Kumar P, Landis C, Brown RS, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir plus ribavirin for treatment of HCV infection in patients with advanced liver disease. Gastroenterology. 2015;149(3):649-659. Chayama K, Suzuki F, Karino Y, et al. Efficacy and safety of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in Japanese patients with chronic genotype 1 hepatitis C virus infection with and without cirrhosis. J Gastroenterol. 2018;53(4):557-565. Checa-Cabot CA, Stoszek SK, Quarleri J, Losso MH, Ivalo S, Peixoto MF, et al. Mother-to-child transmission of hepatitis C virus (HCV) among HIV/HCV-coinfected women. J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc. 2013;2(2):126-135. Chen TY, Ding EL, Seage-Iii GR, Kim AY. Meta-analysis: increased mortality associated with hepatitis C in HIV-infected persons is unrelated to HIV disease progression. Clin Infect Dis. 2009;49(10):1605-1615. Chen G, Wang C, Chen J. Hepatitis B reactivation in hepatitis B and C coinfected patients treated with antiviral agents: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Hepatology. 2017;66(1):13-26. Chew KW, Allen SA, Taylor LE, Rich JD, Feller E. Treatment outcomes with pegylated interferon and ribavirin for male prisoners with chronic hepatitis C. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2009;43(7):686-691. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 12 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Chhatwal J, Kanwal F, Roberts MS, Dunn MA. Cost-effectiveness and budget impact of hepatitis C virus treatment with sofosbuvir and ledipasvir in the United States. Ann Intern Med. 2015;162(6):397-406. Chhatwal J, He T, Hur C, Lopez-Olivo MA. Direct-acting antiviral agents for patients with hepatitis C virus genotype 1 infection are cost-saving. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017;15(6):827-837. Chidi AP, Rogal S, Bryce CL, Bryce CL. Cost-effectiveness of new antiviral regimens for treatment-naïve US veterans with hepatitis C. Hepatology. 2016;63(2):428-436. Chiu WN, Hung CH, Lu SN, et al. Real-world effectiveness of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir and ledipasvir/sofosbuvir for mixed genotype hepatitis C infection: a multicenter pooled analysis in Taiwan. J Viral Hepat. 2020;27(9):866-872. Choi DT, Puenpatom A, Yu X, et al. Effectiveness of elbasvir/grazoprevir in patients with hepatitis C virus genotype 1 infection and chronic kidney disease in the United States veterans population. Antiviral Res. 2020;174:104698. Chou R, Wasson N. Blood tests to diagnose fibrosis or cirrhosis in patients with chronic hepatitis C virus infection: a systematic review. Ann Intern Med. 2013;158(11):807-820. Chou R, Dana T, Fu R, et al. US Preventative Services Task Force. Screening for hepatitis C virus infection in adolescents and adults: updated evidence report and systematic review for the US Preventive Services Task Force. JAMA. 2020;. Chu CJ, Lee SD. Hepatitis B virus/hepatitis C virus coinfection: epidemiology, clinical features, viral interactions and treatment. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008;23(4):512-520. Clark BT, Garcia-Tsao G, Fraenkel L. Patterns and predictors of treatment initiation and completion in patients with chronic hepatitis C virus infection. Patient Prefer Adherence. 2012;6:285-295. Coffin PO, Santos GM, Behar E, et al. Randomized feasibility trial of directly observed therapy versus unobserved hepatitis C treatment with ledipasvir-sofosbuvir among people who inject drugs. PLoS One. 2019;14(6):e0217471. Collins JM, Raphael KL, Terry C, Cartwright EJ, Pillai A, Anania FA, et al. Hepatitis B virus reactivation during successful treatment of hepatitis C virus with sofosbuvir and simeprevir. Clin Infect Dis. 2015;61(8):1304-1306. Colombo M, Aghemo A, Liu H, Zhang J, Dvory-Sobol H, Hyland R, et al. Treatment with ledipasvir-sofosbuvir for 12 or 24 weeks in kidney transplant recipients with chronic hepatitis C virus genotype 1 or 4 infection: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2017;166(2):109-117. Comarmond C, Garrido M, Pol S. Direct-acting antiviral therapy restores immune tolerance to patients with hepatitis C virus-induced cryoglobulinemia vasculitis. Gastroenterology. 2017;152(8):2052-2062.e2. Comer SD, Sullivan MA, Vosburg SK, et al. Abuse liability of intravenous buprenorphine/naloxone and buprenorphine HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 13 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) alone in buprenorphine-maintained intravenous heroin abusers. Addiction. 2010;105(4):709-718. Conjeevaram HS, Wahed AS, Afdhal NH, Howell CD, Everhart JE, Hoofnagle JH, et al. Changes in insulin sensitivity and body weight during and after peginterferon and ribavirin therapy for hepatitis C. Gastroenterology. 2011;140(2):469-477. Connell LE, Salihu HM, Salemi JL, August EM, Weldeselasse H, Mbah AK. Maternal hepatitis B and hepatitis C carrier status and perinatal outcomes. Liver Int. 2011;31(8):1163-1170. Conte D, Fraquelli M, Prati D, Colucci A, Minola E. Prevalence and clinical course of chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection and rate of HCV vertical transmission in a cohort of 15,250 pregnant women. Hepatology. 2000;31(3):751-755. Cooper CL, Naggie S, Saag M, Yang JC, Stamm LM, Dvory-Sobol H, et al. Successful re-treatment of hepatitis C virus in patients coinfected with HIV who relapsed after 12 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir. Clin Infect Dis. 2016;63(4):528-531. Coppola N, De PS, Pisaturo M, Paradiso L, Macera M, Capoluongo N, et al. Sustained virological response to antiviral treatment in chronic hepatitis C patients may be predictable by HCV-RNA clearance in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. J Clin Virol. 2013;58(4):748-750. Corrao G, Arico S. Independent and combined action of hepatitis C virus infection and alcohol consumption on the risk of symptomatic liver cirrhosis. Hepatology. 1998;27(4):914-919. Cotter TG, Paul S, Sandikci B, et al. Increasing utilization and excellent initial outcomes following liver transplant of hepatitis C virus (HCV)-viremic donors into HCV-negative recipients: outcomes following liver transplant of HCV-viremic donors. Hepatology. 2019;69:2381-2395. Cotter TG, Paul S, Sandikci B, et al. Increasing utilization and excellent initial outcomes following liver transplant of hepatitis C virus (HCV)-viremic donors into HCV-negative recipients: outcomes following liver transplant of HCV-viremic donors. Hepatology. 2019;69:2381-2395. Cottrell E, Chou R, Wasson N, Rahman B, Guise J-M. Reducing risk for mother-to-infant transmission of hepatitis C virus: a systematic review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2013;158(2):109-113. Covert E, Hoffmann J, Emmanuel B, et al. Retreatment with SOF/VEL/VOX in treatment-experienced patients with and without HIV: the RESOLVE study [abstract 583]. The Liver Meeting. San Francisco, CA; 2018. Cox AL, Netski DM, Mosbruger T, Sherman SG, Strathdee S, Ompad D, et al. Prospective evaluation of community- acquired acute-phase hepatitis C virus infection. Clin Infect Dis. 2005;40(7):951-958. Coyle C, Viner K, Hughes E, Kwakwa H, Zibbell JE, Vellozzi C, et al. Identification and linkage to care of HCV-infected persons in five health centers - Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 2012-2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2015;64(17):459-463. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 14 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Coyle C, Kwakwa H. Dual-routine HCV/HIV testing: seroprevalence and linkage to care in four community health centers in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Public Health Rep. 2016;131(Suppl 1):41-52. Coyle C, Moorman AC, Bartholomew T, et al. The hepatitis C virus care continuum: linkage to hepatitis C virus care and treatment among patients at an urban health network, Philadelphia, PA. Hepatology. 2019;70(2):476-486. Cua IH, Hui JM, Kench JG, George J. Genotype-specific interactions of insulin resistance, steatosis, and fibrosis in chronic hepatitis C. Hepatology. 2008;48:723-731. Cunningham EB, Amin J, Feld JJ, et al. Adherence to sofosbuvir and velpatasvir among people with chronic HCV infection and recent injection drug use: the SIMPLIFY study. Int J Drug Policy. 2018;62:14-23. Currie SL, Ryan JC, Tracy D, Wright TL, George S, McQuaid R, et al. A prospective study to examine persistent HCV reinfection in injection drug users who have previously cleared the virus. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2008;93(1-2):148-154. Curry MP, Forns X, Chung RT, Terrault NA, Brown, Jr. RS, Fenkel JM, et al. Sofosbuvir and ribavirin prevent recurrence of HCV infection after liver transplantation: an open-label study. Gastroenterology. 2015;148(1):100-107. Curry MP, O'Leary JG, Bzowej N, Muir AJ, Korenblat KM, Fenkel JM, et al. Sofosbuvir and velpatasvir for HCV in patients with decompensated cirrhosis. N Engl J Med. 2015;373(27):2618-2628. Cypel M, Feld JJ, Galasso M, et al. Prevention of viral transmission during lung transplantation with hepatitis C-viraemic donors: an open-label, single-centre, pilot trial. Lancet Respir Med. 2019;:pii: S2213-2600(19)30268-1. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(19)30268-1. [Epub ahead of print]. D'Ambrosio R, Pasulo L, Puoti M, et al. Real-world effectiveness and safety of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in 723 patients with chronic hepatitis C. J Hepatol. 2019;70(3):379-387. Da BL, Lourdusamy V, Kushner T, Dieterich D, Saberi B. Efficacy of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir in direct-acting antiviral experienced patients with hepatitis C virus. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020;:Epub ahead of print. Daklinza [package insert]. Princeton, NJ: Bristol-Myers Squibb Company; 2016. Dalgard O, Bjøro K, Hellum K, Myrvang B, Skaug K, Gutigard B, et al.. Treatment of chronic hepatitis C in injecting drug users: 5 years' follow-up. Eur Addict Res. 2002;8(1):45-49. Danta M, Brown D, Bhagani S, Pybus OG, Sabin CA, Nelson M, et al. Recent epidemic of acute hepatitis C virus in HIV- positive men who have sex with men linked to high-risk sexual behaviours. AIDS. 2007;21(8):983-991. Daskalopoulou M, Rodger AJ, Phillips AN, Sherr L, Elford J, McDonnell J, et al. Condomless sex in HIV-diagnosed men who have sex with men in the UK: prevalence, correlates, and implications for HIV transmission. Sex Transm Infect. 2017;93(8):590-598. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 15 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) de la Flor C, Porsa E, Nijhawan AE. Opt-out HIV and hepatitis C testing at the Dallas county jail: uptake, prevalence, and demographic characteristics of testers. Public Health Rep. 2017;132(6):617-621. de Ledinghen V, Barreiro P, Foucher J, Labarga P, Castera L, Vispo ME, et al. Liver fibrosis on account of chronic hepatitis C is more severe in HIV-positive than HIV-negative patients despite antiretroviral therapy. J Viral Hepat. 2008;15(6):427-433. De Monte A, Courjon J, Anty R, Cua E, Naqvi A, Mondain V, et al. Direct-acting antiviral treatment in adults infected with hepatitis C virus: reactivation of hepatitis B virus coinfection as a further challenge. J Clin Virol. 2016;78:27-30. DeCarolis DD, Westanmo AD, Chen YC, Boese AL, Walquist MA, Rector TS. Evaluation of a potential interaction between new regimens to treat hepatitis C and warfarin. Ann Pharmacother. 2016;(50):909-917. Degasperi E, Spinetti A, Lombardi A, et al. Real-life effectiveness and safety of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir in hepatitis C patients with previous DAA failure. J Hepatol. 2019;71(6):1106-1115. Degenhardt L, Randall D, Hall W, Law M, Butler T, Burns L. Mortality among clients of a state-wide opioid pharmacotherapy program over 20 years: risk factors and lives saved. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2009;105(1-2):9-15. Degenhardt L, Peacock A, Colledge S, et al. Global prevalence of injecting drug use and sociodemographic characteristics and prevalence of HIV, HBV, and HCV in people who inject drugs: a multistage systematic review. Lancet Glob Health. 2017;5(12):e1192-e1207. Del Bello D, Cha A, Sorbera M, Bichoupan K, Levine C, Doyle E, et al. Real-world sustained virological response rates of sofosbuvir-containing regimens in patients coinfected with hepatitis C and HIV. Clin Infect Dis. 2016 March 1th ed. 2016;62(12):1497-1504. Delotte J, Barjoan E, Berrébi A, et al. Obstetric management does not influence vertical transmission of HCV infection: results of the ALHICE group study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2014;27(7):664-670. Denniston MM, Klevens RM, McQuillan GM, Jiles RB. Awareness of infection, knowledge of hepatitis C, and medical follow-up among individuals testing positive for hepatitis C: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2001-2008. Hepatology. 2012;55(6):1652-1661. Denniston MM, Jiles RB, Drobeniuc J, Klevens RM, Ward JW, McQuillan GM, et al. Chronic hepatitis C virus infection in the United States, National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2003 to 2010. Ann Intern Med. 2014;160(5):293-300. Des Jarlais D, Perlis T, Arasteh K, Torian LV, Hagan H, Beatrice S, et al. Reductions in hepatitis C virus and HIV infections among injecting drug users in New York City, 1990-2001. AIDS. 2005;19 Suppl 3:S20-25. Desnoyer A, Pospai D, Lê MPatrick, Gervais A, Heurgué-Berlot A, Laradi A, et al.. Pharmacokinetics, safety and efficacy HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 16 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) of a full dose sofosbuvir-based regimen given daily in hemodialysis patients with chronic hepatitis C. J Hepatol. 2016;65(1):40-47. Deterding K, Spinner CD, Schott E, et al. Ledipasvir plus sofosbuvir fixed-dose combination for 6 weeks in patients with acute hepatitis C virus genotype 1 monoinfection (HepNet Acute HCV IV): an open-label, single-arm, phase 2 study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2017;17(2):215-222. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS). Guidelines for the use of antiretroviral agents in adults and adolescents living with HIV [Internet]. Department of Health and Human Services; 2017 [cited Accessed June 13, 2019]. https://aidsinfo.nih.gov/guidelines/html/1/adult-and-adolescent-arv/0 DHHS Guidelines for the use of antiretroviral agents in adults and adolescents living with HIV. Updated July 9, 2020. Accessed July 9. 2020;. Department of Health and Human Services, panel on antiretroviral guidelines for adults and adolescents. Guidelines for the use of antiretroviral agents in adults and adolescents with HIV [Internet]. 2021. https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/sites/default/files/guidelines/documents/ Di Bisceglie AM, Shiffman ML, Everson GT, Lindsay KL, Everhart JE, Wright EC, et al. Prolonged therapy of advanced chronic hepatitis C with low-dose peginterferon. N Engl J Med. 2008;359(23):2429-2441. Diaz-Castrillon CE, Huckaby LV, Witer L, et al. National trends and outcomes of heart-kidney transplantation using hepatitis C positive donors. Clin Transplant [Internet]. 2022;36(4). https://doi.org/10.1111/ctr.14581 Dienstag JL, Ghany MG, Morgan TR, Di Bisceglie AM, Bonkovsky HL, Kim HY, et al. A prospective study of the rate of progression in compensated, histologically advanced chronic hepatitis C. Hepatology. 2011;54(2):396-405. Dieperink E, Ho SB, Heit S, Durfee JM, Thuras P, Willenbring ML. Significant reductions in drinking following brief alcohol treatment provided in a hepatitis C clinic. Psychosomatics. 2010;51(2):149-156. Dieterich D, Rockstroh JK, Orkin C, Gutierrez F, Klein MB, Reynes J, et al. Simeprevir (TMC435) with pegylated interferon/ribavirin in patients coinfected with HCV genotype 1 and HIV-1: a phase 3 study. Clin Infect Dis. 2014;59(11):1579-1587. Dieterich D, Nelson M, Soriano V, Arasteh K, Guardiola JM, Rockstroh JK, et al. Faldaprevir and pegylated interferon alpha-2a/ribavirin in individuals co-infected with hepatitis C virus genotype-1 and HIV. AIDS. 2015;29(5):571-581. Dietz J, Spengler U, B M, et al. Efficacy of retreatment after failed direct-acting antiviral therapy in patients with HCV genotype 1-3 infections. J Hepatol [Internet]. 2021;19(1):195-198. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cgh.2019.10.051 J D, VC DMaio, De Salazar A, et al. Failure on voxilaprevir, velpatasvir, sofosbuvir and efficacy of rescue therapy. J Hepatol [Internet]. 2021;74(4):801-810. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2020.11.017 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 17 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Dore GJ, Altice F, Litwin AH, Dalgard O, Gane EJ, Shibolet O, et al. Elbasvir-grazoprevir to treat hepatitis C virus infection in persons receiving opioid agonist therapy: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2016;165(9):625-634. Dore G, Grebely J, Altice F, Litwin AH, Dalgard O, Gane E, et al. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) reinfection and injecting risk behavior following elbasvir (EBR)/grazoprevir (GZR) treatment in participants on opiate agonist therapy (OAT): Co-STAR part B [abstract 195]. Presented at the Liver Meeting 2017; October 20–24, 2017; Washington, DC. Drazilova S, Janicko M, Skladany L, et al. Glucose metabolism changes in patients with chronic hepatitis C treated with direct acting antivirals. Can J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2018;2018:6095097. Drysdale K, Townley C, Mahomed F, Foster G. Effectiveness of therapy in 16,567 directly-acting antiviral treated people in England: High response rates in genotype 3 hepatitis C infection regardless of degree of fibrosis, but ribavirin improves response in cirrhosis. International Liver Congress. Vienna, Austria; 2019. Duque JC, Dejman A, Venkat V, Hernandez M, Roth D, Ladino MA. Acute interstitial nephritis following treatment with direct-acting antiviral agents in hepatitis C virus-infected patients: A case series. Clin Nephrol. 2021;95(1):22-27. Durand CM, Bowring MG, Brown DM, et al. Direct-acting antiviral prophylaxis in kidney transplantation from hepatitis C virus-infected donors to noninfected recipients: an open-label nonrandomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2018;168(8):533-540. Durand CM, Barnaba B, Yu S, et al. Four-week direct-acting antiviral prophylaxis for kidney transplantation from hepatitis C-viremic donors to hepatitis C-negative recipients: an open-label nonrandomized study. Ann Intern Med. 2021;174(1):137-138. Durier N, Nguyen C, White LJ. Treatment of hepatitis C as prevention: a modeling case study in Vietnam. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34548. Durose MR, Cooper AD, Snyder HN, . Recidivism of prisoners released in 30 states in 2005: patterns from 2005 to 2010 [Internet]. BJS; 2014 . https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4986 European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL recommendations on treatment of hepatitis C 2016. J Hepatol. 2017;66(1):153-194. European Association for the Study of the Liver; Asociacion Latinoamericana para el Estudio del Higado. EASL-ALEH clinical practice guidelines: non-invasive tests for evaluation of liver disease severity and prognosis. J Hepatol. 2015;63(1):237-264. Eckman MH, Ward JW, Sherman KE. Cost effectiveness of universal screening for hepatitis C virus infection in the era of direct-acting, pangenotypic treatment regimens. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2019;17(5):930-939.e9. Edlin BR, Eckhardt BJ, Shu MA, Holmberg SD, Swan T. Toward a more accurate estimate of the prevalence of hepatitis C in the United States. Hepatology. 2015;62(5):1353-1363. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 18 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Eisenberger U, Friebus-Kardash J, Guberina H, et al. Treatment with grazoprevir/elbasvir for renal transplant recipients with chronic hepatitis C virus infection and impaired allograft function. Transplant Direct. 2019;5(1):e419. El-Sherif O, Jiang ZG, Tapper EB, et al. Baseline factors associated with improvements in decompensated cirrhosis after direct-acting antiviral therapy for hepatitis C virus infection. Gastroenterology. 2018;154(8):2111-2121.e8. Elbasha E, Greaves W, Roth D, Nwankwo C. Cost-effectiveness of elbasvir/grazoprevir use in treatment-naive and treatment-experienced patients with hepatitis C virus genotype 1 infection and chronic kidney disease in the United States. J Viral Hepat. 2017;24(4):268-279. Garimella T, You X, Wang R, Luo W-L, Huang S-P, Kandoussi H, et al. A review of daclatasvir drug-drug interactions. Adv Ther. 2016;33(11):1867-1884. Emery JS, Kuczynski M, La D. Efficacy and safety of direct acting antivirals for the treatment of mixed cryoglobulinemia. Am J Gastroenterol. 2017;112(8):1298-1308. Ende AR, Kim NH, Yeh MM, Harper J, Landis CS. Fulminant hepatitis B reactivation leading to liver transplantation in a patient with chronic hepatitis C treated with simeprevir and sofosbuvir: a case report. J Med Case Rep. 2015;9:164. England K, Pembrey L, Tovo PA, Newell ML. Excluding hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection by serology in young infants of HCV-infected mothers. Acta Paediatr. 2005;94:444-450. European paediatric hepatitis C virus network. A significant sex--but not elective cesarean section--effect on mother-to- child transmission of hepatitis C virus infection. J Infect Dis. 2005;192(11):1872-1879. Eron JJ, Young B, Cooper DA, Youle M, DeJesus E, Andrade-Villanueva J, et al. Switch to a raltegravir-based regimen versus continuation of a lopinavir-ritonavir-based regimen in stable HIV-infected patients with suppressed viraemia (SWITCHMRK 1 and 2): two multicentre, double-blind, randomised controlled trials. Lancet. 2010;375(9712):396-407. Eron JJ, Lalezari J, Slim J, Gathe J, Ruane PJ, Wang C, et al. Safety and efficacy of ombitasvir - 450/r and dasabuvir and ribavirin in HCV/HIV-1 co-infected patients receiving atazanavir or raltegravir ART regimens. J Int AIDS Soc. 2014;17(4 Suppl 3):19500. Doss W, Shiha G, Hassany M, Soliman R, Fouad R, Khairy M, et al. Sofosbuvir plus ribavirin for treating Egyptian patients with hepatitis C genotype 4. Journal of Hepatol. 2015;63(3):581-585. Esmat GE, Doss WH, Qaqish RB, Waked I, Shiha GE, Yosry A, et al. Efficacy and Safety of Co-Formulated Ombitasvir/Paritaprevir/Ritonavir with Ribavirin in Adults with Chronic HCV Genotype 4 Infection in Egypt (AGATE-II) [Abstract 708]. In 66th Annual Meeting of the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD), November 13-17, 2015. San Francisco, CA; 2015. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 19 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Esteban R, Pineda JA, Calleja JL, et al. Efficacy of sofosbuvir and velpatasvir, with and without ribavirin, in patients with hepatitis C virus genotype 3 infection and cirrhosis. Gastroenterology. 2018;155(4):1120-1127.e4. Everhart JE, Lok AS, Kim HY, Morgan TR, Lindsay KL, Chung RT, et al. Weight-related effects on disease progression in the hepatitis C antiviral long-term treatment against cirrhosis trial. Gastroenterology. 2009;137(2):549-557. Everhart JE, Wright EC, Goodman ZD, Dienstag JL, Hoefs JC, Kleiner DE, et al. Prognostic value of Ishak fibrosis stage: findings from the hepatitis C antiviral long-term treatment against cirrhosis trial. Hepatology. 2010;51(2):585-594. Everson GT. Treatment of patients with hepatitis C virus on the waiting list. Liver Transpl. 2003;9(11):S90-S94. Everson GT, Trotter J, Forman L, Kugelmas M, Halprin A, Fey B, et al. Treatment of advanced hepatitis C with a low accelerating dosage regimen of antiviral therapy. Hepatology. 2005;42(2):255-262. Everson GT, Hoefs JC, Seeff LB, Bonkovsky HL, Naishadham D, Shiffman ML, et al. Impact of disease severity on outcome of antiviral therapy for chronic hepatitis C: lessons from the HALT-C trial. Hepatology. 2006;44(6):1675-1684. Fabbiani M, Lombardi A, Colaneri M, et al. High rates of sustained virological response despite premature discontinuation of directly acting antivirals in HCV-infected patients treated in a real-life setting. J Viral Hepat. 2021;28(3):558-568. Fabrizi F, Poordad F, Martin P. Hepatitis C infection and the patient with end-stage renal disease. Hepatology. 2002;36(1):3-10. Fabrizi F, Takkouche B, Lunghi G, Dixit V, Messa P, Martin P. The impact of hepatitis C virus infection on survival in dialysis patients: meta-analysis of observational studies. J Viral Hepat. 2007;14(10):697-703. Fabrizi F, Messa P, Martin P. Health-related quality of life in dialysis patients with HCV infection. Int J Artif Organs. 2009;32(8):473-481. Fabrizi F, Dixit V, Messa P. Impact of hepatitis C on survival in dialysis patients: a link with cardiovascular mortality?. J Viral Hepat. 2012;19(9):601-607. Fabrizi F, Dixit V, Messa P. Antiviral therapy of symptomatic HCV-associated mixed cryoglobulinemia: meta-analysis of clinical studies. J Med Virol. 2013;85(6):1019-1027. Fabrizi F, Martin P, Dixit V, Messa P. Meta-analysis of observational studies: hepatitis C and survival after renal transplant. J Viral Hepat. 2014;21(5):314-324. Fabrizi F, Verdesca S, Messa P, Martin P. Hepatitis C virus infection increases the risk of developing chronic kidney disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Dig Dis Sci. 2015;60(12):3801-3813. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 20 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Falade-Nwulia O, Irvin R, Merkow A, et al. Barriers and facilitators of hepatitis C treatment uptake among people who inject drugs enrolled in opioid treatment programs in Baltimore. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2019;100:45-51. Farmand S, Wirth S, Loffler H. Spontaneous clearance of hepatitis C virus in vertically infected children. Eur J Pediatr. 2012;171:253-258. Federal Bureau of Prisons. Evaluation and management of chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. 2016. Feld JJ, Liang TJ. Hepatitis C -- identifying patients with progressive liver injury. Hepatology. 2006;43(2 Suppl 1):S194-S206. Feld JJ, Kowdley KV, Coakley E, Sigal S, Nelson DR, Crawford D, et al. Treatment of HCV with ABT-450/r-ombitasvir and dasabuvir with ribavirin. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(17):1594-1603. Feld JJ, Jacobson IM, Hézode C, Asselah T, Ruane PJ, Gruener N, et al.. Sofosbuvir and velpatasvir for HCV genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, and 6 infection. N Engl J Med. 2015;373(27):2599-2607. Feld JJ, Moreno C, Trinh R. Sustained virologic response of 100% in HCV genotype 1b patients with cirrhosis receiving ombitasvir/paritaprevir/r and dasabuvir for 12 weeks. J Hepatol . 2016;64(2):301-307. Feld JJ, Humar A, Singer L, et al. Lung transplantation from HCV-infected donors to HCV-uninfected recipients [abstract 0223]. The Liver Meeting. San Francisco, CA; 2018. Feld JJ, Cypel M, Kumar D, et al. Short-course, direct-acting antivirals and ezetimibe to prevent HCV infection in recipients of organs from HCV-infected donors: a phase 3, single-centre, open-label study. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020;5(7):649-657. Feng HP, Caro L, Dunnington KM, Guo Z, Cardillo-Marricco N, Wolford D, et al. A clinically meaningful drug-drug interaction observed between Zepatier (Grazoprevir/Elbasvir) and Stribild HIV fixed dose combination in healthy subjects [Abstract O-22]. In International Workshop on Clinical Pharmacology of HIV & Hepatitis Therapy. June 8-10. 2016. Feng HP, Guo Z, Fandozzi C, et al. Pharmacokinetic interactions between the fixed-dose combinations of elvitegravir/cobicistat/tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/emtricitabine and elbasvir/grazoprevir in healthy adult participants. Clin Pharmacol Drug Dev. 2019;8(7):952-961. Feng HP, Guo Z, Caro L, et al. Assessment of drug interaction potential between the hepatitis C virus direct-acting antiviral agents elbasvir/grazoprevir and the nucleotide analog reverse-transcriptase inhibitor tenofovir disoproxil fumarate. Clin Pharmacol Drug Dev. 2019;8(7):962-970. Feng HP, Guo Z, Ross L, et al. Assessment of drug interaction potential between the direct-acting antiviral agents elbasvir/grazoprevir and integrase inhibitors raltegravir and dolutegravir. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2019;74(3):710-717. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 21 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Ferenci P, Bernstein D, Lalezari J, Cohen D, Luo Y, Cooper C, et al. ABT-450/r-ombitasvir and dasabuvir with or without ribavirin for HCV. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(21):1983-1992. Fernandez N, Towers CV, Wolfe L, Hennessy MD, Weitz B, Porter S. Sharing of snorting straws and hepatitis C virus infection in pregnant women. Obstet and Gynecol. 2016;128(2):234-237. Fernandez-Carrillo C, Lens S, Llop E, Pascasio JM, Fernández I, Baliellas C, et al.. Treatment of hepatitis C virus in patients with advanced cirrhosis: always justified? Analysis of the HEPA-C registry. J Hepatology . 2016;64(2):S133. Fierer DS, Uriel AJ, Carriero DC, Klepper A, Dieterich D, Mullen MP, et al. Liver fibrosis during an outbreak of acute hepatitis C virus infection in HIV-infected men: a prospective cohort study. J Infect Dis. 2008;198(5):683-686. Fierer DS, Dieterich D, Fiel MI, Branch AD, Marks KM, Fusco DN, et al. Rapid progression to decompensated cirrhosis, liver transplant, and death in HIV-infected men after primary hepatitis C virus infection. Clin Infect Dis. 2013;56(7):1038-1043. Fierer DS, Wyles DL. Re-treatment of hepatitis C infection after multiple failures of direct-acting antiviral therapy. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2020;7(4):ofaa095. Finelli L, Miller JT, Tokars JI, Alter MJ, Arduino MJ. National surveillance of dialysis-associated diseases in the United States, 2002. Semin Dial. 2005;18(1):52-61. Fischer G, Ortner R, Rohrmeister K, et al. Methadone versus buprenorphine in pregnant addicts: a double-blind, double- dummy comparison study. Addiction. 2006;101(2):275-281. Fissell RB, Bragg-Gresham JL, Woods JD, Jadoul M, Gillespie B, Hedderwick SA, et al. Patterns of hepatitis C prevalence and seroconversion in hemodialysis units from three continents: the DOPPS. Kidney Int. 2004;65(6):2335-2342. Flamm SL, Bacon B, Curry MP, et al. Real-world use of elbasvir-grazoprevir in patients with chronic hepatitis C: retrospective analyses from the TRIO network. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2018;47(11):1511-1522. Flamm S, Reddy KR, Zadeikis N, et al. Efficacy and pharmacokinetics of glecaprevir and pibrentasvir with concurrent use of acid-reducing agents in patients with chronic HCV infection. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2019;17(3):527-535.e6. Flamm SL, Kort J, Marx SE, et al. Effectiveness of 8-week glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for treatment-naive, compensated cirrhotic patients with chronic hepatitis C infection. Adv Ther. 2020;37(5):2267-2274. Fleischer R, Boxwell D, Sherman KE. Nucleoside analogues and mitochondrial toxicity. Clin Infect Dis. 2004;38:e79-e80. Fontana RJ, Sanyal AJ, Ghany MG, Lee WM, Reid AE, Naishadham D, et al. Factors that determine the development and progression of gastroesophageal varices in patients with chronic hepatitis C. Gastroenterology. 2010;138(7):2321-2331. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 22 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Fontana RJ, Brown RS, Moreno-Zamora A, Prieto M, Joshi S, Londoño M-C, et al.. Daclatasvir combined with sofosbuvir or simeprevir in liver transplant recipients with severe recurrent hepatitis C infection. Liver Transpl. 2016;22(4):446-458. Ford MM, Johnson N, Desai P, Rude E, Laraque F. From care to cure: demonstrating a model of clinical patient navigation for hepatitis C care and treatment in high-need patients. Clin Infect Dis. 2017;64(5):685-691. Ford MM, Jordan AE, Johnson N, Rude E, Laraque F, Varma JK, et al. Check Hep C: a community-based approach to hepatitis C diagnosis and linkage to care in high-risk populations. J Public Health Manag Pract. 2018;24(1):41-48. Forman LM, Lewis JD, Berlin JA, Feldman HI, Lucey MR. The association between hepatitis C infection and survival after orthotopic liver transplantation. Gastroenterology. 2002;122(4):889-896. Forns X, Navasa M, Rodes J. Treatment of HCV infection in patients with advanced cirrhosis. Hepatology. 2004;40(2):498. Forns X, Charlton MR, Denning J, McHutchison JG, Symonds WT, Brainard D, et al. Sofosbuvir compassionate use program for patients with severe recurrent hepatitis C after liver transplantation. Hepatology. 2015;61(5):1485-1494. Forns X, Gordon SC, Zuckerman E, Lawitz E, Calleja JL, Hofer H, et al. Grazoprevir and elbasvir plus ribavirin for chronic HCV genotype-1 infection after failure of combination therapy containing a direct-acting antiviral agent. J Hepatol. 2015;63(3):564-572. Forns X, Lee SS, Valdes J, Lens S, Ghalib R, Aguilar H, et al. Glecaprevir plus pibrentasvir for chronic hepatitis C virus genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 infection in adults with compensated cirrhosis (EXPEDITION-1): a single-arm, open-label, multicentre phase 3 trial. Lancet Infect Dis. 2017;17(10):1062-1068. Forns X, Berenguer M, Herzer K, Sterneck M, Donato MFrancesca, Andreone P, et al. Efficacy, safety, and pharmacokinetics of simeprevir, daclatasvir, and ribavirin in patients with recurrent hepatitis C virus genotype 1b infection after orthotopic liver transplantation: the phase II SATURN study. Transpl Infect Dis. 2017;19(3). Foster GR, Goldin RD, Thomas HC. Chronic hepatitis C virus infection causes a significant reduction in quality of life in the absence of cirrhosis. Hepatology. 1998;27(1):209-212. Foster GR, Pianko S, Brown A, Forton D, Nahass RG, George J, et al. Efficacy of sofosbuvir plus ribavirin with or without peginterferon-alfa in patients with hepatitis C virus genotype 3 infection and treatment-experienced patients with cirrhosis and hepatitis C virus genotype 2 infection. Gastroenterology. 2015;149(6):1462-1470. Foster GR, Afdhal NH, Roberts SK. Sofosbuvir and velpatasvir for HCV genotype 2 and 3 infection. N Engl J Med. 2015;373(27):2608-2617. Foster GR, Irving WL, Cheung MCM, Walker AJ, Hudson BE, Verma S, et al. Cohort study of the impact of direct acting HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 23 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) antiviral therapy in patients with chronic hepatitis C and decompensated cirrhosis. J Hepatol. 2016;64(6):1224-1231. Foster GR, Agarwal K, Cramp M, Moreea S, Barclay ST, Collier J, et al. C-ISLE: Grazoprevir/Elbasvir plus Sofosbuvir in Treatment-naive and Treatment-experienced HCV GT3 Cirrhotic Patients Treated for 8, 12 or 16 weeks [Abstract 74]. In The Liver Meeting. 2016. Foster GR, Gane E, Asatryan A, Asselah T, Ruane PJ, Pol S, et al. ENDURANCE-3: safety and efficacy of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir compared to sofosbuvir plus daclatasvir in treatment-naive HCV genotype 3-infected patients without cirrhosis. J Hepatol [Internet]. 2017;66(1):S33. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0168-8278(17)30326-4 Foster AL, Gaisa MM, Hijdra RM, Turner SS, Morey TJ, Jacobson KB, et al. Shedding of Hepatitis C Virus Into the Rectum of HIV-infected Men Who Have Sex With Men. Clin Infect Dis. 2017;64(3):284-288. Foster GR, Agarwal K, Cramp ME. Elbasvir/grazoprevir and sofosbuvir for hepatitis C virus genotype 3 infection with compensated cirrhosis: A randomized trial. Hepatology. 2018;67(6):2113-2126. Fox RK, Currie SL, Evans J, Wright TL, Tobler L, Phelps B, et al. Hepatitis C virus infection among prisoners in the California state correctional system. Clin Infect Dis. 2005;41(2):177-186. Franco A, Moreso F, Merino E, et al. Renal transplantation from seropositive hepatitis C virus donors to seronegative recipients in Spain: a prospective study. Transpl Int. 2019;32(7):710-716. Fraser H, Martin NK, Brummer-Korvenkontio H, Carrieri P, Dalgard O, Dillon J, et al. Model projections on the impact of HCV treatment in the prevention of HCV transmission among people who inject drugs in Europe. J Hepatol. 2018;68(3):402-411. Fraser H, Zibbell J, Hoerger T, et al. Scaling-up HCV prevention and treatment interventions in rural United States-model projections for tackling an increasing epidemic. Addiction. 2018;113(1):173-182. Friebus-Kardash J, Gackler A, Kribben A, et al. Successful early sofosbuvir-based antiviral treatment after transplantation of kidneys from HCV-viremic donors into HCV-negative recipients. Transpl Infect Dis. 2019;21:e13146. Frimpong JA. Missed opportunities for hepatitis C testing in opioid treatment programs. Am J Public Health. 2013;103(6):1028-1030. Frimpong JA, D'Aunno T, Jiang L. Determinants of the availability of hepatitis C testing services in opioid treatment programs: results from a national study. Am J Public Health. 2014;104(6):e75-e82. Fudala PJ, Bridge TP, Herbert S, et al. Office-based treatment of opiate addiction with a sublingual-tablet formulation of buprenorphine and naloxone. N Engl J Med. 2003;349(10):949-958. Gambotti L, Batisse D, Colin-de-Verdiere N, Delaroque-Astagneau E, Desenclos JC, Dominguez S, et al. Acute hepatitis HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 24 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) C infection in HIV positive men who have sex with men in Paris, France, 2001-2004. Euro Surveill. 2005;10(5):115-117. Gamkrelidze I, Pawlotsky JM, Lazarus JV, et al. Progress towards hepatitis C virus elimination in high-income countries: An updated analysis. Liver Int. 2021;41(3):456-463. Gandhi Y, Adamczyk R, Wang R, Stonier M, Kandoussi H, Hesney M, et al. Assessment of drug-drug interactions between daclatasvir and darunavir/ritonavir or lopinavir/ritonavir. Presented at 16th International Workshop on Clinical Pharmacology of HIV and Hepatitis Therapy; May 26-28, 2015; Washington DC. 2015;. Gane EJ, Hyland RH, An D, Svarovskaia ES, Pang PS, Brainard D, et al. Efficacy of ledipasvir and sofosbuvir, with or without ribavirin, for 12 weeks in patients with HCV genotype 3 or 6 infection. Gastroenterology. 2015;149(6):1454-1461. Gane EJ, Shiffman ML, Etzkorn K, Morelli G, Stedman C, Davis MN, et al. Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir in Combination With Ribavirin for 24 Weeks Is Effective Retreatment for Patients Who Failed Prior NS5A-Containing DAA Regimens: Results of the Retreatment Study. In 51st Annual Meeting of the European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL). April 13-17. Barcelona, Spain; 2016. Gane EJ, Shiffman ML, Etzkorn K, et al, et al. Sofosbuvir-velpatasvir with ribavirin for 24 weeks in hepatitis C virus patients previously treated with a direct-acting antiviral regimen. Hepatology. 2017;66(4):1083-1089. Gane E, Lawitz E, Pugatch D, Papatheodoridis G, Bräu N, Brown A, et al.. Glecaprevir and pibrentasvir in patients with HCV and severe renal impairment. N Engl J Med. 2017;377(15):1448-1455. Garazzino S, Calitri C, Versace A, et al. Natural history of vertically acquired HCV infection and associated autoimmune phenomena. Eur J Pediatr. 2014;173:1025-1031. Garcia-Bengoechea M, Basaras M, Barrio J, Arrese E, Montalvo II, Arenas JI, et al. Late disappearance of hepatitis C virus RNA from peripheral blood mononuclear cells in patients with chronic hepatitis C in sustained response after alpha- interferon therapy. Am J Gastroenterol. 1999;94(7):1902-1905. Garcia-Tsao G, Sanyal AJ, Grace ND, Carey W, Diseases practiceguidelines, Gastroenterology practiceparameters. Prevention and management of gastroesophageal varices and variceal hemorrhage in cirrhosis. Hepatology. 2007;46(3):922-938. Garcia-Tsao G, Abraldes JG, Berzigotti A, Bosch J. Portal hypertensive bleeding in cirrhosis: Risk stratification, diagnosis, and management: 2016 practice guidance by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases. Hepatology. 2017;65(1):310-335. Garimella T, Wang R, Luo WL, Luo WL. Single-dose pharmacokinetics and safety of daclatasvir in subjects with renal function impairment. Antivir Ther. 2015;20(5):535-543. Garrison KL, Custodio JM, Pang PS, Das M, Cheng F, Ma G, et al. Drug interactions between anti-HCV antivirals ledipasvir/sofosbuvir and integrase strand transfer inhibitor–based regimens. Presented at 16th International Workshop on HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 25 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Clinical Pharmacology of HIV and Hepatitis Therapy; May 26-28, 2015; Washington DC. Garrison KL, Kirby B, Stamm LM, Ma G, Vu A, Ling J, et al. Drug-drug interaction profile of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir fixed dose combination [FRI-187]. J Hepatol. 2017;66(1):S492-S493. Garrison KL, German P, Mogalian E, Mathias A. The drug-drug interaction potential of antiviral agents for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C infection. Drug Metab Dispos. 2018;46(8):1212-1225. Garrison KL, Humenluk R, West SK, et al. Lack of clinically relevant drug interactions between bictegravir/emtricitabine/tenofovir alafenamide and ledipasvir/sofosbuvir or sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir [P264]. Presented at HIV Drug Therapy/Glasglow; October 28-31, 2018. Glasglow, United Kingdom; 2018. Gaur N, Malhotra V, Agrawal D, et al. Sofosbuvir-velpatasvir fixed drug combination for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C infection in patients with end-stage renal disease and kidney transplantation. J Clin Exp Hepatol. 2020;10(3):189-193. Geng X-X, Huang R-G, Lin J-M, Jiang N, Yang X-X. Transient elastography in clinical detection of liver cirrhosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Saudi J Gastroenterol. 2016;22(4):294-303. George SL, Bacon BR, Brunt EM, Mihindukulasuriya KL, Hoffmann J, Di Bisceglie AM. Clinical, virologic, histologic, and biochemical outcomes after successful HCV therapy: a 5-year follow-up of 150 patients. Hepatology. 2009;49(3):729-738. Gerber L, Estep M, Stepanova M, Escheik C, Weinstein A, Younossi ZM. Effects of viral eradication with ledipasvir and sofosbuvir, with or without ribavirin, on measures of fatigue in patients with chronic hepatitis C virus infection. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016;14(1):156-164.e3. German P, Pang P, West S, Han LL, Sajwani K, Mathias A. Drug interactions between direct acting anti-HCV antivirals sofosbuvir and ledipasvir and HIV antiretrovirals [abstract 06]. Presented at 15th International Workshop on Clinical Pharmacology of HIV and Hepatitis Therapy; May 19-21, 2014; Washington DC. German P, Garrison K, Pang PS, Stamm LM, Ray AS, Shen G, et al. Drug-drug interactions between anti-HCV regimen ledipasvir/sofosbuvir and antiretrovirals [abstract 82]. Presented at 22nd Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections; February 23-26, 2015; Seattle, WA. Gervais A, Bacq Y, Bernuau J, Martinot M, Auperin A, Boyer N, et al. Decrease in serum ALT and increase in serum HCV RNA during pregnancy in women with chronic hepatitis C. J Hepatol. 2000;32(2):293-299. Ghany MG, Kleiner DE, Alter H, Doo E, Khokar F, Promrat K, et al. Progression of fibrosis in chronic hepatitis C. Gastroenterology. 2003;124(1):97-104. Ghany MG, Strader DB, Thomas DL, Seeff LB, Diseases AAssociatio. Diagnosis, management, and treatment of hepatitis C: an update. Hepatology. 2009;49(4):1335-1374. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 26 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Ghany MG, Nelson DR, Strader DB, Thomas DL, Seeff LB, Seeff LB. An update on treatment of genotype 1 chronic hepatitis C virus infection: 2011 practice guideline by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases. Hepatology. 2011;54(4):1433-1444. Ghosn J, Pierre-Francois S, Thibault V, Duvivier C, Tubiana R, Simon A, et al. Acute hepatitis C in HIV-infected men who have sex with men. HIV Med. 2004;5(4):303-306. Gidea CG, Narula N, Reyentovich A, et al. Increased early acute cellular rejection events in hepatitis C-positive heart transplantation. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2020;S1053-2498(20):31624-7. Gisbert JP, Garcia-Buey L, Pajares JM, Moreno-Otero R. Prevalence of hepatitis C virus infection in porphyria cutanea tarda: systematic review and meta-analysis. J Hepatol. 2003;39(4):620-627. Gisbert JP, Garcia-Buey L, Pajares JM, Moreno-Otero R. Systematic review: regression of lymphoproliferative disorders after treatment for hepatitis C infection. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2005;21(6):653-662. Goel A, Chen Q, Chhatwal J, Aggarwal R. Cost-effectiveness of generic pan-genotypic sofosbuvir/velpatasvir versus genotype-dependent direct-acting antivirals for hepatitis C treatment. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2018;33(12):2029-2036. Goldberg DS, Abt P, Reese PP, et al. Transplanting HCV-infected kidneys into uninfected recipients. N Engl J Med. 2017;377(11):1105. Goldenberg SM, Montaner J, Braschel M, Socias E, Guillemi S, Shannon K. Dual sexual and drug-related predictors of hepatitis C incidence among sex workers in a Canadian setting: gaps and opportunities for scale-up of hepatitis C virus prevention, treatment, and care. Int J Infect Dis. 2017;55:31-37. Gonzalez-Peralta RP, Langham MR, Andres JM, Mohan P, Colombani PM, Alford MK, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma in 2 young adolescents with chronic hepatitis C. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2009;48(5):630-635. Goodman ZD, Makhlouf HR, Liu L, Balistreri W, Gonzalez-Peralta RP, Haber B, et al. Pathology of chronic hepatitis C in children: liver biopsy findings in the Peds-C trial. Hepatology. 2008;47(3):836-843. Gordon SC, Teshale EH, Spradling PR, Moorman AC, Boscarino JA, Schmidt MA, et al. Lower rates of emergency visits and hospitalizations among chronic hepatitis C patients with sustained virological response to interferon-free direct-acting antiviral therapy (2014-2018). Clin Infect Dis [Internet]. 2022;. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciac124 Götz HM, van Doornum G, Niesters HG, Hollander JGden, Thio HB, de Zwart O. A cluster of acute hepatitis C virus infection among men who have sex with men--results from contact tracing and public health implications. AIDS. 2005;19(9):969-974. Govindasamy D, Ford N, Kranzer K. Risk factors, barriers and facilitators for linkage to antiretroviral therapy care: a systematic review. AIDS. 2012;26(16):2059-2067. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 27 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Gowda C, Smith S, Crim L, Moyer K, Sanchez PJ, . Nucleic Acid Testing for Diagnosis of Perinatally Acquired Hepatitis C Virus Infection in Early Infancy. Clin Infect Dis [Internet]. 2021;73(9):e3340-e3346. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa949 Gower E, Estes C, Blach S, Razavi-Shearer K, Razavi H. Global epidemiology and genotype distribution of the hepatitis C virus infection. J Hepatol. 2014;61(1 Suppl):S45-S57. Grady BPX, Vanhommerig JW, Schinkel J, Weegink CJ, Bruisten SM, Lindenburg CEA, et al. Low incidence of reinfection with the hepatitis C virus following treatment in active drug users in Amsterdam. Eur J of Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012;24(11):1302-1307. Grady BP, Schinkel J, Thomas XV, Dalgard O. Hepatitis C virus reinfection following treatment among people who use drugs. Clin Infect Dis. 2013;57(Suppl 2):S105-S110. Grebely J, Knight E, Ngai T, Genoway KA, Raffa JD, Storms M, et al. Reinfection with hepatitis C virus following sustained virological response in injection drug users: HCV reinfection following SVR in IDUs. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010;25(7):1281-1284. Grebely J, Matthews GV, Hellard M, Shaw D, Shaw D, Petoumenos K, Yeung B, et al. Adherence to treatment for recently acquired hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection among injecting drug users. J Hepatol. 2011;55(1):76-85. Grebely J, Pham ST, Matthews GV, Petoumenos K, Bull RA, Yeung B, et al. Hepatitis C virus reinfection and superinfection among treated and untreated participants with recent infection. Hepatology. 2012;55(4):1058-1069. Grebely J, Page K, Sacks-Davis R, van der Loeff MS, Rice TM, Bruneau J, et al. The effects of female sex, viral genotype, and IL28B genotype on spontaneous clearance of acute hepatitis C virus infection. Hepatology. 2014;59(1):109-120. Grebely J, Dore GJ, Zeuzem S, Aspinall RJ, Fox R, Han L, et al. Efficacy and safety of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir in patients with chronic hepatitis C virus infection receiving opioid substitution therapy: analysis of phase 3 ASTRAL trials. Clin Infect Dis. 2016;63(11):1479-1481. Grebely J, Hajarizadeh B, Dore GJ. Direct-acting antiviral agents for HCV infection affecting people who inject drugs. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017;14(11):641-651. Grebely J, Dalgard O, Conway B, Cunningham EB, Bruggmann P, Hajarizadeh B, et al. Sofosbuvir and velpatasvir for hepatitis C virus infection in people with recent injection drug use (SIMPLIFY): an open-label, single-arm, phase 4, multicentre trial. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2018;3(3):153-161. Greenway E, Haines A, Ling SC, et al. Cost-utility analysis of treatment of chronic paediatric hepatitis C with new direct- acting antivirals [abstract 1619]. The Liver Meeting 2019. Boston, Massachusetts; 2019. Gumber SC, Chopra S. Hepatitis C: a multifaceted disease. Review of extrahepatic manifestations. Ann Intern Med. 1995;123(8):615-620. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 28 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Gunthard HF, Aberg JA, Eron JJ, Hoy JF, Telenti A, Benson CA, et al. Antiretroviral treatment of adult HIV infection: 2014 recommendations of the International Antiviral Society-USA panel. JAMA. 2014;312(4):410-425. Gupta N, Mbituyumuremyi A, Kabahizi J, et al. Treatment of chronic hepatitis C virus infection in Rwanda with ledipasvir- sofosbuvir (SHARED): a single-arm trial. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2019;4(2):119-126. Hagan H, Pouget ER, Des-Jarlais DC, Lelutiu-Weinberger C. Meta-regression of hepatitis C virus infection in relation to time since onset of illicit drug injection: the influence of time and place. Am J of Epidemiol. 2008;168(10):1099-1109. Hagström H. Alcohol consumption in concomitant liver disease: how much is too much?. Curr Hepatol Rep. 2017;16(2):152-157. Hammett TM, Harmon MP, Rhodes W. The burden of infectious disease among inmates of and releasees from US correctional facilities, 1997. Am J Public Health. 2002;92(11):1789-1794. Harris DR, Gonin R, Alter HJ, Wright EC, Buskell ZJ, Hollinger FB, et al. The relationship of acute transfusion-associated hepatitis to the development of cirrhosis in the presence of alcohol abuse. Ann Intern Med. 2001;134(2):120-124. Harris, Jr. KA, Arnsten JH, Litwin AH. Successful integration of hepatitis C evaluation and treatment services with methadone maintenance. J Addict Med. 2010;4(1):20-26. Harris RJ, Martin NK, Rand E, Mandal S, Mutimer D, Vickerman P, et al. New treatments for hepatitis C virus (HCV): scope for preventing liver disease and HCV transmission in England. J Viral Hepat. 2016;23(8):631-643. Harrison GI, Murray K, Gore R, et al. The hepatitis C awareness through to treatment (HepCATT) study: improving the cascade of care for hepatitis C virus-infected people who inject drugs in England. Addiction. 2019;114(6):1113-1122. Harrison DS, Giang J, Darling JM. An interaction between glecaprevir, pibrentasvir, and colchicine causing rhabdomyolysis in a patient with chronic renal disease. Clin Liver Dis (Hoboken). 2020;15(1):17-20. Hashem M, Jhaveri R, Saleh DA, Sharaf SA, El-Mougy F, El-Salam LAbd, et al. Spontaneous viral load decline and subsequent clearance of chronic HCV in postpartum women correlates with favorable IL28B allele. Clin Infect Dis. 2017;65(6):999-1005. Hattori Y, Orito E, Ohno T, Sugauchi F, Suzuki S, Sugiura M, et al. Loss of hepatitis C virus RNA after parturition in female patients with chronic HCV infection. J Med Virol. 2003;71(2):205-211. Hayashi K, Ishigami M, Ishizu Y, Ishizu Y. A case of acute hepatitis B in a chronic hepatitis C patient after daclatasvir and asunaprevir combination therapy: hepatitis B virus reactivation or acute self-limited hepatitis?. Clin J Gastroenterol. 2016;9(4):252-256. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 29 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) He T, Li K, Roberts MS, Spaulding AC, Ayer T, Grefenstette JJ, et al. Prevention of hepatitis C by screening and treatment in US prisons. Ann Intern Med. 2016;164(2):84-92. He T, Lopez-Olivo MA, Hur C, Chhatwal J. Systematic review: cost-effectiveness of direct-acting antivirals for treatment of hepatitis C genotypes 2-6. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2017;46(8):711-721. Hegazi A, Lee M, Whittaker W, Green S, Simms R, Cutts R, et al. Chemsex and the city: sexualised substance use in gay bisexual and other men who have sex with men attending sexual health clinics. Int J of STD AIDS. 2017;28(4):362-366. Hellard ME, Hocking JS, Crofts N. The prevalence and the risk behaviours associated with the transmission of hepatitis C virus in Australian correctional facilities. Epidemiol Infect. 2004;132(3):409-15. Hellard ME, Jenkinson R, Higgs P, Stoove MA, Sacks-Davis R, Gold J, et al. Modelling antiviral treatment to prevent hepatitis C infection among people who inject drugs in Victoria, Australia. Med J Aust. 2012;196(10):638-641. Hellard M, Doyle JS, Sacks-Davis R, Thompson AJ, McBryde E. Eradication of hepatitis C infection: the importance of targeting people who inject drugs. Hepatology. 2014;59(2):366-369. Henderson DK, Dembry L, Fishman NO, Grady C, Lundstrom T, Palmore TN, et al. SHEA guideline for management of healthcare workers who are infected with hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and/or human immunodeficiency virus. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2010;31(3):203-232. Hermine O, Lefrere F, Bronowicki JP, Mariette X, Jondeau K, Eclache-Saudreau V, et al. Regression of splenic lymphoma with villous lymphocytes after treatment of hepatitis C virus infection. N Engl J Med. 2002;347(2):89-94. Herzer K, Papadopoulos-Kohn A, Walker A, Achterfeld A, Paul A, Canbay A, et al. Daclatasvir, simeprevir and ribavirin as a promising interferon-free triple regimen for HCV recurrence after liver transplant. Digestion. 2015;91(4):326-333. Hézode C, Asselah T, Reddy KR, Hassanein T, Berenguer M, Fleischer-Stepniewska K, et al.. Ombitasvir plus paritaprevir plus ritonavir with or without ribavirin in treatment-naive and treatment-experienced patients with genotype 4 chronic hepatitis C virus infection (PEARL-I): a randomised, open-label trial. Lancet. 2015;385(9986):2502-2509. Hézode C, Lebray P, de Ledinghen V, Zoulim F, Di Martino V, Boyer N, et al.. Daclatasvir plus sofosbuvir, with or without ribavirin, for hepatitis C virus genotype 3 in a French early access programme [Epub ahead of print]. Liver Int. 2017;37(9):1314-1324. Hezode C, Reau N, Svarovskaia ES, Doehle BP, Shanmugam R, Dvory-Sobol H, et al. Resistance analysis in patients with genotype 1-6 HCV infection treated with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir in the phase III studies. J Hepatol. 2018;68(5):895-903. Higley C, Hsu CC, Smith C, Nadella S, Lalos AT. Safety and efficacy of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir in post-liver transplant patients with previous direct-acting antiviral failure: Six case reports. World J Hepatol. 2020;12(12):1341-1348. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 30 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Ho SB, Brau N, Cheung R, Liu L, Sanchez C, Sklar M, et al. Integrated care increases treatment and improves outcomes of patients with chronic hepatitis C virus infection and psychiatric illness or substance abuse. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015;13(11):2005-2014.e1-3. Hofmeister MG, Rosenthal EM, Barker LK, et al. Estimating prevalence of hepatitis C virus infection in the United States, 2013-2016. Hepatology. 2019;69(3):1020-1031. Holmberg SD, Spradling PR, Moorman AC, Denniston MM. Hepatitis C in the United States. N Engl J Med. 2013;368(20):1859-1861. Holmes HM, Hayley DC, Alexander GC, Sachs GA. Reconsidering medication appropriateness for patients late in life. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166(6):605-609. Honegger J, Crim L, Gowda C, Sanchez PJ. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for detection of vertically-acquired hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection in early infancy [abstract 2215]. ID Week. San Francisco, CA; 2018. Honegger JR, Kim S, Price AA, Kohout JA, McKnight KL, Prasad MR, et al. Loss of immune escape mutations during persistent HCV infection in pregnancy enhances replication of vertically transmitted viruses. Nat Med. 2013;19(11):1529-1533. Hoornenborg E, Achterbergh RCA, Schim van-der-L, Davidovich U, Hogewoning A, de Vries HJC, et al. MSM starting preexposure prophylaxis are at risk of hepatitis C virus infection:. AIDS. 2017;31(11):1603-1610. Hoornenborg E, Coyer L, Boyd A, et al. Amsterdam PrEP project team in the HIV transmission elimination Amsterdam (H- TEAM) initiative. High incidence of HCV in HIV-negative men who have sex with men using pre-exposure prophylaxis. J Hepatol. 2020;72(5):855-864. Hosein SR, Wilson DP. HIV, HCV, and drug use in men who have sex with men. Lancet. 2013;382(9898):1095-1096. Hourigan LF, Macdonald GA, Purdie D, Whitehall VH, Shorthouse C, Clouston A, et al. Fibrosis in chronic hepatitis C correlates significantly with body mass index and steatosis. Hepatology. 1999;29(4):1215-1219. Houssel-Debry P, Coilly A, Fougerou-Leurent C, et al. 12 weeks of a ribavirin-free sofosbuvir and nonstructural protein 5A inhibitor regimen is enough to treat recurrence of hepatitis C after liver transplantation. Hepatology. 2018;68(4):1277-1287. Howe AY, Black S, Curry S, Ludmerer SW, Liu R, Barnard RJO, et al. Virologic resistance analysis from a phase 2 study of MK-5172 combined with pegylated interferon/ribavirin in treatment-naive patients with hepatitis C virus genotype 1 infection. Clin Infect Dis. 2014;59(12):1657-1665. Hsieh YH, Rothman RE, Laeyendecker , et al. Evaluation of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 31 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) recommendations for hepatitis C virus testing in an urban emergency department. Clin Infect Dis. 2016;62(9):1059-1065. Hsu L, Bowlus CL, Stewart SL, Nguyen TT, Dang J, Chan B, et al. Electronic messages increase hepatitis B screening in at-risk Asian American patients: a randomized, controlled trial. Dig Dis Sci. 2013;58(3):807-814. Hsu YC, Lin JT, Ho HJ, Kao YH, Huang YT, Hsiao NW, et al. Antiviral treatment for hepatitis C virus infection is associated with improved renal and cardiovascular outcomes in diabetic patients. Hepatology. 2014;59(4):1293-1302. Hsu YC, Ho HJ, Huang YT, Wang HH, Wu MS, Lin JT, et al. Association between antiviral treatment and extrahepatic outcomes in patients with hepatitis C virus infection. Gut. 2015;64(3):495-503. Huang CF, Tseng KC, Cheng PN, Hung CH, Lo CC, Peng CY, et al. Impact of Sofosbuvir-Based Direct-Acting Antivirals on Renal Function in Chronic Hepatitis C Patients With Impaired Renal Function: A Large Cohort Study From the Nationwide HCV Registry Program (TACR). Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol [Internet]. 2022;20(5):1151-1162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cgh.2021.07.037 Hughes BL, Page CM, Kuller JA, Kuller JA. Hepatitis C in pregnancy: screening, treatment, and management. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2017;217(5):B2-B12. Hung CH, Wang JH, Hu TH, Chen CH, Chang KC, Yen YH, et al. Insulin resistance is associated with hepatocellular carcinoma in chronic hepatitis C infection. World J Gastroenterol. 2010;16(18):2265-2271. Hussein NR, Sidiq Z, Saleem M. Successful treatment of hepatitis c virus genotype 4 in renal transplant recipients with direct-acting antiviral agents. Am J Transplant. 2016th ed. 2016;16(7):2237-2238. Indolfi G, Easterbrook P, Dusheiko GM, et al. Hepatitis C virus infection in children and adolescents. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2019;4:477-487. Ingiliz P, Krznaric I, Stellbrink H-J, Knecht G, Lutz T, Noah C, et al. Multiple hepatitis C virus (HCV) reinfections in HIV- positive men who have sex with men: no influence of HCV genotype switch or interleukin-28B genotype on spontaneous clearance: HCV reinfection in HIV-positive MSM. HIV Med. 2014;15(6):355-361. Ingiliz P, Christensen S, Kimhofer T, Hueppe D, Lutz T, Schewe K, et al. Sofosbuvir and ledipasvir for 8 weeks for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection in HCV-monoinfected and HIV-HCV-coinfected individuals: results from the German hepatitis C cohort (GECCO-01). Clin Infect Dis. 2016;63(10):1320-1324. Ingiliz P, Martin TC, Rodger A, Stellbrink HJ, Mauss S, Boesecke C, et al. HCV reinfection incidence and spontaneous clearance rates in HIV-positive men who have sex with men in Western Europe. J Hepatol. 2017;66(2):282-287. Ioannou GN, Beste LA, Chang MF, Green PK, Lowy E, Tsui JI, et al. Effectiveness of sofosbuvir, ledipasvir/sofosbuvir, or paritaprevir/ritonavir/ombitasvir and dasabuvir regimens for treatment of patients with hepatitis C in the Veterans Affairs national health care system. Gastroenterology. 2016;151(3):457-471.e5. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 32 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Isakov V, Gankina N, Morozov V, et al. Ledipasvir-sofosbuvir for 8 weeks in non-cirrhotic patients with previously untreated genotype 1 HCV Infection ± HIV-1 co-infection. Clin Drug Investig. 2018;38(3):239-247. Isakov V, Chulanov V, Abdurakhmanov D, et al. Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir for the treatment of HCV: excellent results from a phase-3, open-label study in Russia and Sweden. Infect Dis (Lond). 2019;51(2):131-139. Islam MM, Topp L, Conigrave KM, White A, Reid SE, Grummett S, et al. Linkage into specialist hepatitis C treatment services of injecting drug users attending a needle syringe program-based primary healthcare centre. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2012;43(4):440-445. Islam N, Krajden M, Shoveller J, Gustafson P, Gilbert M, Buxton JA, et al. Incidence, risk factors, and prevention of hepatitis C reinfection: a population-based cohort study. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017;2(3):200-210. Jacobson IM, Gordon SC, Kowdley KV, et al. Sofosbuvir for hepatitis C genotype 2 or 3 in patients without treatment options. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:1867-1877. Jacobson IM, Poordad F, Firpi-Morell R, Everson GT. Efficacy and Safety of Grazoprevir and Elbasvir in Hepatitis C Genotype 1-infected Patients with Child–Pugh class B cirrhosis (C-salt part A) [Abstract O008]. In 50th Annual Meeting of the European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL), April 22-26. Vienna, Austria; 2015. Jacobson IM, Asante-Appiah E, Wong P, Black T, Howe A, Wahl J, et al. Prevalence and impact of baseline NSA resistance associated variants (RAVs) on the efficacy of elbasvir/grazoprevir (EBR/GZR) against GT1a infection [abstract LB-22]. The Liver Meeting. San Francisco, CA; 2015. Jacobson IM, Lawitz E, Gane EJ, Willems BE, Ruane PJ, Nahass RG, et al. Efficacy of 8 weeks of sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir in patients with chronic HCV infection: 2 phase 3 randomized trials. Gastroenterology. 2017;153(1):113-122. Jacobson IM, Poordad F, Firpi-Morell R, Firpi-Morell R. Elbasvir/grazoprevir in people with hepatitis C genotype 1 infection and Child-Pugh class B cirrhosis: the C-SALT study. Clin Transl Gastroenterol. 2019;10(4):e00007. Jadoul M, Cornu C, van Ypersele de Strihou C. Universal precautions prevent hepatitis C virus transmission: a 54 month follow-up of the Belgian multicenter study. The Universitaires Cliniques St-Luc (UCL) collaborative group. Kidney Int. 1998;53(4):1022-1025. Jezequel C, Bardou-Jacquet E, Desille Y, Renard I, Laine F, Lelan C, et al. Survival of patients infected by chronic hepatitis C and F0F1 fibrosis at baseline after a 15 year follow-up [P0709]. J Hepatol. 2015;62(Suppl 2):S589. Jhaveri R. Diagnosis and management of hepatitis C virus-infected children. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2011;30(11):983-985. Jhaveri R, Hashem M, El-Kamary SS, Saleh D'aA, Sharaf SA, El-Mougy F, et al. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) vertical transmission in 12-month-old infants born to HCV-infected women and assessment of maternal risk factors. Open Forum HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 33 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Infect Dis. 2015;2(2):ofv089. Jiang Y, Nwankwo C. Epidemiologic impact of expanding chronic hepatitis C (CHC) treatment in people who inject drug in the United States: a mathematical model using data from the C-EDGE CO-STAR study. Presented at the Liver Meeting 2017; October 20–24, 2017; Washington, DC. Jin F, Matthews GV, Grulich AE. Sexual transmission of hepatitis C virus among gay and bisexual men: a systematic review. Sex Health. 2017;14(1):28-41. Johnson RJ, Gretch DR, Yamabe H, Hart J, Bacchi CE, Hartwell P, et al. Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis associated with hepatitis C virus infection. N Engl J Med. 1993;328(7):465-470. Johnson RJ, Gretch DR, Couser WG, Alpers CE, Wilson J, Chung M, et al. Hepatitis C virus-associated glomerulonephritis. Effect of alpha-interferon therapy. Kidney Int. 1994;46(6):1700-1704. Johnson RE, Eissenberg T, Stitzer ML, Strain EC, Liebson IA, Bigelow GE. A placebo controlled clinical trial of buprenorphine as a treatment for opioid dependence. Drug Alcohol Depend. 1995;40(1):17-25. Johnson RE, Chutuape MA, Strain EC, Walsh SL, Stitzer ML, Bigelow GE. A comparison of levomethadyl acetate, buprenorphine, and methadone for opioid dependence. N Engl J Med. 2000;343(18):1290-1297. Jonas MM, Romero R, Sokal EM, et al. Safety and efficacy of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir in pediatric patients 6 to Jonas MM, Squires RH, Rhee S. Pharmacokinetics, safety, and efficacy of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in pediatric patients with genotypes 1-6 chronic HCV infection: part 1 of the Dora study [abstract 2379]. The Liver Meeting. San Francisco, CA; 2018. Jonas MM, Squires RH, Rhee S, et al. Pharmacokinetics, safety, and efficacy of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in adolescents with chronic hepatitis C virus: part 1 of the DORA study. Hepatology. 2019;:[Epub ahead of print]. Jonas MM, Romero R, Sokal EM, et al. Safety and efficacy of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir in pediatric patients 6 to Jonas MM, Lon HK, Rhee S, Gilmour SM, Gonzalez-Peralta RP, Leung D, et al. Pharmacokinetics of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in children with chronic HCV infection: interim analysis of part 2 of the DORA study [abstract 1551]. The Liver Meeting. Boston. Boston, Massachusetts; 2019. Jonas MM, Rhee S, Kelly DA, et al. Pharmacokinetics, safety, and efficacy of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in children with chronic hepatitis C virus: part 2 of the DORA study. Hepatology. 2021;74(1):19-27. Jones HE, Johnson RE, Jasinski DR, et al. Buprenorphine versus methadone in the treatment of pregnant opioid- dependent patients: effects on the neonatal abstinence syndrome. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2005;79(1):1-10. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 34 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Jones HE, Kaltenbach K, Heil SH, et al. Neonatal abstinence syndrome after methadone or buprenorphine exposure. N Engl J Med. 2010;363(24):2320-2331. Jones CM, Logan J, Gladden RM, Bohm MK. Vital Signs: Demographic and substance use trends among heroin users - United States, 2002-2013. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2015;64(26):719-725. Jones JM, Kracalik I, Levi ME, 3rd JSBowman, Berger JJ, Bixler D, et al. Assessing Solid Organ Donors and Monitoring Transplant Recipients for Human Immunodeficiency Virus, Hepatitis B Virus, and Hepatitis C Virus Infection - U.S. Public Health Service Guideline, 2020. MMWR Recomm Rep [Internet]. 2020;69(4):1-16. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.rr6904a1 Kakko J, Svanborg KD, Kreek MJ, Heilig M. 1-year retention and social function after buprenorphine-assisted relapse prevention treatment for heroin dependence in Sweden: a randomised, placebo-controlled trial . Lancet. 2003;361(9358):662-668. Kakko J, Gronbladh L, Svanborg KD, et al. A stepped care strategy using buprenorphine and methadone versus conventional methadone maintenance in heroin dependence: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Psychiatry. 2007;164(5):797-803. Kamal SM. Acute hepatitis C: a systematic review. Am J Gastroenterol. 2008;103(5):1283-1297. Kamal S, Khan MAli, Seth A, Cholankeril G, Gupta D, Singh U, et al. Beneficial effects of statins on the rates of hepatic fibrosis, hepatic decompensation, and mortality in chronic liver disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Gastroenterol. 2017;112(10):1495-1505. Kamar N, Marion O, Rostaing L, Cointault O, Ribes D, Lavayssière L, et al.. Efficacy and safety of sofosbuvir-based antiviral therapy to treat hepatitis C virus infection after kidney transplantation. Am J Transplant. 2016;16(5):1474-1479. Kampman K, Jarvis M. American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM) national practice guideline for the use of medications in the treatment of addiction involving opioid use. J Addict Med. 2915;9(5):358-367. Kanwal F, Kramer JR, Ilyas J, Duan Z, El-Serag HB. HCV genotype 3 is associated with an increased risk of cirrhosis and hepatocellular cancer in a national sample of US veterans with HCV. Hepatology. 2014;60(1):98-105. Kapila N, Al-Khalloufi K, Bejarano PA, Vanatta JM, Zervos XB. Fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis after kidney transplantation from HCV-viremic donors to HCV-negative recipients: A unique complication in the DAA era. Am J Transplant. 2019;:Aug 26. doi: 10.1111/ajt.15583. [Epub ahead of print]. Kattakuzhy S, Gross C, Emmanuel B. Expansion of treatment for hepatitis C virus infection by task shifting to community- based nonspecialist providers: a nonrandomized clinical trial. Ann Intern Med. 2017;167(5):311-318. Kidney disease: improving global outcomes (KDIGO). KDIGO clinical practice guidelines for the prevention, diagnosis, HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 35 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) evaluation, and treatment of hepatitis C in chronic kidney disease. Kidney Int Suppl. 2008;(109):S1-S99. Khatri A, Trinh R, Zhao W, Podsadecki T, Menon RM. Drug-drug interaction between the direct-acting antiviral regimen of ombitasvir-paritaprevir-ritonavir plus dasabuvir and the HIV antiretroviral agent dolutegravir or abacavir plus lamivudine. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2016;60(10):6244-6251. Khatri A, Dutta S, Wang H, et al. Evaluation of drug-drug interactions between hepatitis C antiviral agents ombitasvir, paritaprevir/ritonavir, and dasabuvir and HIV-1 protease inhibitors. Clin Infect Dis. 2016;62(8):972-979. Khokhar OS, Lewis JH. Reasons why patients infected with chronic hepatitis C virus choose to defer treatment: do they alter their decision with time?. Dig Dis Sci. 2007;52(5):1168-1176. Kim AY, Nagami EH, Birch CE, Bowen MJ, Lauer GM, McGovern BH. A simple strategy to identify acute hepatitis C virus infection among newly incarcerated injection drug users. Hepatology. 2013;57(3):944-952. Kim M, Stern J, Robalino R, et al. Caregiver exposure to hepatitis C virus following transplantation with hepatitis C viremic donor organs: A case series. Transpl Infect Dis [Internet]. 2022;24(2). https://doi.org/10.1111/tid.13775 Kirk GD, Mehta SH, Astemborski J, Galai N, Washington J, Higgins Y, et al. HIV, age, and the severity of hepatitis C virus- related liver disease: a cohort study. Ann Intern Med. 2013;158(9):658-666. Klein SJ, Wright LN, Birkhead GS, Mojica BA, Klopf LC, Klein LA, et al. Promoting HCV treatment completion for prison inmates: New York state's hepatitis C continuity program. Public Health Rep. 2007;122(2 Suppl):83-88. Kleiner DE. The liver biopsy in chronic hepatitis C: a view from the other side of the microscope. Semin Liver Dis. 2005;25(1):52-64. Kohler JJ, Nettles JH, Amblard F, Hurwitz SJ, Bassit L, Stanton RA, et al. Approaches to hepatitis C treatment and cure using NS5A inhibitors. Infect Drug Resist. 2014;7:41-56. Kohli A, Kapoor R, Sims Z, Nelson A, Sidharthan S, Lam B, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for hepatitis C genotype 4: a proof-of-concept, single-centre, open-label phase 2a cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2015;15(9):1049-1054. Konerman MA, Mehta SH, Sutcliffe CG, Vu T, Higgins Y, Torbenson MS, et al. Fibrosis progression in human immunodeficiency virus/hepatitis C virus coinfected adults: prospective analysis of 435 liver biopsy pairs. Hepatology. 2014;59(3):767-775. Koneru A, Nelson N, Hariri S, Canary L, Sanders KJ, Maxwell JF, et al. Increased hepatitis C virus (HCV) detection in women of childbearing age and potential risk for vertical transmission - United States and Kentucky, 2011-2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65(28):705-710. Korthuis PT, McCarty D, Weimer M, et al. Primary care-based models for the treatment of opioid use disorder: a scoping HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 36 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) review. Ann Intern Med. 2017;166(4):268-278. Kosloski MP, Dutta S, Viani RM, Qi X, Trinh R, Campbell A, et al. Glecaprevir and pibrentasvir interactions with combination antiretroviral regimens [#413]. In Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections. Seattle, WA; 2017. Kosloski MP, Oberoi R, Wang S, et al. Drug-drug interactions of glecaprevir and pibrentasvir coadministered with human immunodeficiency virus antiretrovirals. J Infect Dis. 2020;221(2):223-231. Kowdley KV, Gordon SC, Reddy KR, Rossaro L, Bernstein DE, Lawitz EJ, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for 8 or 12 weeks for chronic HCV without cirrhosis. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(20):1879-1888. Kowdley KV, Sundaram V, Jeon CY, Qureshi K, Latt NL, Sahota A, et al. Eight weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir is effective for selected patients with genotype 1 hepatitis C virus infection. Hepatology. 2016;65(4):1094-1103. Kramer JR, Puenpatom A, Erickson KF, et al. Real-world effectiveness of elbasvir/grazoprevir In HCV-infected patients in the US Veterans Affairs healthcare system. J Viral Hepat. 2018;25(11):1270-1279. Krassenburg L, Maan R, Ramji A, et al. Clinical outcomes following DAA therapy in patients with HCV-related cirrhosis depend on disease severity. J Hepatol. 2021;74(5):1053-1063. Krishnan P, Pilot-Matias T, Schnell G, Tripathi R, Ng TI, Reisch T, et al. Pooled resistance analysis in HCV genotype 1-6 infected patients treated with glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in phase 2 and 3 clinical trials. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2018;62(10):pii: e01249-18. Kruse RL, Kramer JR, Tyson GL, Duan Z, Chen L, El-Serag HB, et al. Clinical outcomes of hepatitis B virus coinfection in a United States cohort of hepatitis C virus-infected patients. Hepatology. 2014;60(6):1871-1878. Kucirka LM, Peters TG, Segev DL. Impact of donor hepatitis C virus infection status on death and need for liver transplant in hepatitis C virus-positive kidney transplant recipients. Am J Kidney Dis. 2012;60:112-120. Kukla M, Piotrowski D, Waluga M, Hartleb M. Insulin resistance and its consequences in chronic hepatitis C. Clin Exp Hepatol. 2015;1(1):17-29. Kuncio DE, E. Newbern C, Fernandez-Viña MH, Herdman B, Johnson CC, Viner KM. Comparison of risk-based hepatitis C screening and the true seroprevalence in an urban prison system. J Urban Health. 2015;92(2):379-386. Kuncio DE, E. Newbern C, Johnson CC, Viner KM. Failure to test and identify perinatally infected children born to hepatitis C virus-infected women. Clin Infect Dis. 2016;62(8):980-985. Kushner T, Serper M, Kaplan DE. Delta hepatitis within the Veterans Affairs medical system in the United States: Prevalence, risk factors, and outcomes. J Hepatol. 2015;63(3):586-592. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 37 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Kwo PY, Gane EJ, Peng C-Y, et al. Efficacy and safety of grazoprevir/elbasvir +/- RBV for 12 weeks in patients with HCV G1 or G4 infection who previously failed peginterferon/RBV: C-EDGE treatment-experienced trial [P0886]. J Hepatol. 2015;62(Suppl 2):S674-S675. Kwo PY, Gitlin N, Nahass R, et al. Simeprevir plus sofosbuvir (12 and 8 weeks) in hepatitis C virus genotype 1-infected patients without cirrhosis: OPTIMIST-1, a phase 3, randomized study. Hepatology. 2016;64(2):370-380. Kwo PY, Wyles DL, Wang S, Poordad F, Gane E, Maliakkal B, et al. 100% SVR4 with ABT-493 and ABT-530 with or without ribavirin in treatment-naive HCV genotype 3-infected patients with cirrhosis. J Hepatol. 2016;64(2):S208. Kwo PY, Gane EJ, Peng CY, Pearlman B, Vierling JM, Serfaty L, et al. Effectiveness of elbasvir and grazoprevir combination, with or without ribavirin, for treatment-experienced patients with chronic hepatitis C infection. Gastroenterology. 2017;152(1):164-175.e4. Kwo PY, Poordad F, Asatryan A, Wang S, Wyles DL, Hassanein T, et al. Glecaprevir and pibrentasvir yield high response rates in patients with HCV genotype 1-6 without cirrhosis. J Hepatol. 2017;67(2):263-271. Kwok RM, Ahn J, Schiano TD, Te HS, Potosky DR, Tierney A, et al. Sofosbuvir plus ledipasvir for recurrent hepatitis C in liver transplant recipients. Liver Transpl. 2016;22(11):1536-1543. Kwong AJ, Wall A, Melcher M, et al. Liver transplantation for hepatitis C virus (HCV) non-viremic recipients with HCV viremic donors. Am J Transplant. 2019;19(5):1380-1387. LaBelle CT, Han SC, Bergeron A, Samet JH. Office-based opioid treatment with buprenorphine (OBOT-B): statewide implementation of the Massachusetts collaborative care model in community health centers. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2016;(60):6-13. Lai JC, Kahn JG, Tavakol M, Peters MG, Roberts JP. Reducing infection transmission in solid organ transplantation through donor nucleic acid testing: a cost-effectiveness analysis. Am J Transplant. 2013;13(10):2611-2618. Lalezari J, Sullivan J, Varunok P, et al. Ombitasvir/paritaprevir/r and dasabuvir plus ribavirin in HCV genotype 1-infected patients on methadone or buprenorphine. J Hepatol. 2015;63(2):364-369. Lambers FA, Prins M, Thomas X, et al, et al. Alarming incidence of hepatitis C virus re-infection after treatment of sexually acquired acute hepatitis C virus infection in HIV-infected MSM. AIDS. 2011;25(17):F21-F27. Lampertico P, Carrión JA, Curry M, et al. Real-world effectiveness and safety of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for the treatment of patients with chronic HCV infection: a meta-analysis. J Hepatol. 2020;72(6):1112-1121. Landau DA, Scerra S, Sene D, Resche-Rigon M, Saadoun D, Cacoub P. Causes and predictive factors of mortality in a cohort of patients with hepatitis C virus-related cryoglobulinemic vasculitis treated with antiviral therapy. J Rheumatol. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 38 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) 2010;37(3):615-621. Lange B, Roberts T, Cohn J. Diagnostic accuracy of detection and quantification of HBV-DNA and HCV-RNA using dried blood spot (DBS) samples - a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Infect Dis. 2017;17(Suppl 1):693. Larney S, Kopinski H, Beckwith CG, et al. Incidence and prevalence of hepatitis C in prisons and other closed settings: results of a systematic review and meta-analysis. Hepatology. 2013;58(4):1215-1224. Lawitz E, Mangia A, Wyles D, et al. Sofosbuvir for previously untreated chronic hepatitis C infection. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:1878-1887. Lawitz EJ, Poordad F, Pang PS, Hyland RH, Ding X, Mo H, et al. Sofosbuvir and ledipasvir fixed-dose combination with and without ribavirin in treatment-naive and previously treated patients with genotype 1 hepatitis C virus infection (LONESTAR): an open-label, randomised, phase 2 trial. Lancet. 2014;383(9916):515-523. Lawitz EJ, Sulkowski MS, Ghalib R, Rodriguez-Torres M, Younossi ZM, Corregidor A, et al. Simeprevir plus sofosbuvir, with or without ribavirin, to treat chronic infection with hepatitis C virus genotype 1 in non-responders to pegylated interferon and ribavirin and treatment-naive patients: the COSMOS randomised study. Lancet. 2014;384(9956):1756-1765. Lawitz EJ, Gane EJ, Pearlman B, et al. Efficacy and safety of 12 wks vs 18 wks of treatment w/ GRZ and ELB w/ or without RBV for HCV GT1 infection in previously untreated pts w/ cirrhosis and pts w/ previous null response w/ or without cirrhosis (C-WORTHY), randomised, open-label phase 2 trial. Lancet. 2015;385(9973):1075-1086. Lawitz EJ, Poordad F, Gutierrez JA, et al. Simeprevir, daclatasvir and sofosbuvir for hepatitis C virus-infected patients with decompensated liver disease. J Viral Hepat. 2016 Nov 23th ed. 2017;24(4):287-294. Lawitz E, Landis C, Maliakkal B, et al. Safety and efficacy of treatment with once daily ledipasvir/sofobuvir (90/400 mg) for 12 weeks in genotype 1 HCV infected patients with severe renal impairment. The Liver Meeting. Boston, MA; 2017. Lawitz EJ, Gane EJ, Zadeikis N, et al. Efficacy and safety of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in patients with chronic HCV infection and moderate to severe renal impairment: an integrated analysis [abstract 0715B]. The Liver Meeting. San Francisco, CA; 2018. Lawitz E, Flisiak R, Abunimeh M, et al. Efficacy and safety of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in renally impaired patients with chronic HCV infection. Liver Int. 2020;40(5):1032-1041. Lawrinson P, Ali R, Buavirat A, Chiamwongpaet S, Dvoryak S, Habrat B, et al. Key findings from the WHO collaborative study on substitution therapy for opioid dependence and HIV/AIDS. Addiction. 2008;103(9):1484-1492. Lee SR, Kardos KW, Schiff ER, Berne CA, Mounzer K, Banks AT, et al. Evaluation of a new, rapid test for detecting HCV infection, suitable for use with blood or oral fluid. J Virol Methods. 2011;172(1-2):27-31. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 39 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Lee CK, Perez-Atayde AR, Mitchell PD, Raza R, Afdhal NH, Jonas MM. Serum biomarkers and transient elastography as predictors of advanced liver fibrosis in a United States cohort: the Boston Children's Hospital experience. J Pediatr. 2013;163(4):1058-1064.e2. Lee JJ, Lin MY, Chang JS, et al. Hepatitis C virus infection increases risk of developing end-stage renal disease using competing risk analysis. PLoS One. 2014;9(6):e100790. Lee SW, Lee TY, Yang SS, Peng YC, Yeh HZ, Chang CS. Prevalence of hepatitis B reactivation among Chinese individuals with chronic hepatitis C treated with pan-oral direct-acting antivirals. Gastroenterology Res. 2018;11(2):124-129. Leroy V, Angus P, Bronowicki JP, et al. Daclatasvir, sofosbuvir, and ribavirin for hepatitis C virus genotype 3 and advanced liver disease: A randomized phase III study (ALLY-3+). Hepatology. 2016 Mar 4.th ed. 2016;63(5):1430-1441. Levitsky J, Verna EC, O'Leary JG, et al. Perioperative ledipasvir-sofosbuvir for HCV in liver-transplant recipients. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(21):2106-2108. Levitsky J, Formica RN, Bloom RD, et al. The American Society of Transplantation Consensus Conference on the use of hepatitis C viremic donors in solid organ transplantation. Am J Transplant. 2017;17(11):2790-2802. Lewis JH, Mortensen ME, Zweig S, Fusco MJ, Medoff JR, Belder R, et al. Efficacy and safety of high-dose pravastatin in hypercholesterolemic patients with well-compensated chronic liver disease: results of a prospective, randomized, double- blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial. Hepatology. 2007;46(5):1453-1463. Li J, Gordon SC, Rupp LB, et al. Sustained virological response to hepatitis C treatment decreases the incidence of complications associated with type 2 diabetes. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2019;49(5):599-608. Li M, Chen J, Fang Z, Li Y, Lin Q. Sofosbuvir-based regimen is safe and effective for hepatitis C infected patients with stage 4-5 chronic kidney disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Virol J. 2019;16(1):34. Limketkai BN, Mehta SH, Sutcliffe CG, Higgins YM, Torbenson MS, Brinkley SC, et al. Relationship of liver disease stage and antiviral therapy with liver-related events and death in adults coinfected with HIV/HCV. JAMA. 2012;308(4):370-378. Lin HH, Kao JH. Hepatitis C virus load during pregnancy and puerperium. BJOG. 2000;107(12):1503-1506. Linas BP, Wong AY, Schackman BR, Kim AY, Freedberg KA. Cost-effective screening for acute hepatitis C virus infection in HIV-infected men who have sex with men. Clin Infect Dis. 2012;55(2):279-290. Linas BP, Barter DM, Morgan JR, Pho MT, Leff JA, Schackman BR, et al. The cost-effectiveness of sofosbuvir-based regimens for treatment of hepatitis C virus genotype 2 or 3 infection. Ann. Intern. Med. 2015;162(9):619-629. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 40 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Ling W, Wesson DR, Charuvastra C, Klett CJ. A controlled trial comparing buprenorphine and methadone maintenance in opioid dependence. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1996;53(5):401-407. Ling W, Charuvastra C, Collins JF, et al. Buprenorphine maintenance treatment of opiate dependence: a multicenter, randomized clinical trial. Addiction. 1998;93(4):475-486. Ling W, Casadonte P, Bigelow G, et al. Buprenorphine implants for treatment of opioid dependence: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2010;304(14):1576-1583. Litwin AH, Harris KA, Nahvi S, et al. Successful treatment of chronic hepatitis C with pegylated interferon in combination with ribavirin in a methadone maintenance treatment program. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2009;37(1):32-40. Litwin AH, Smith BD, Drainoni ML, McKee D, Gifford AL, Koppelman E, et al. Primary care-based interventions are associated with increases in hepatitis C virus testing for patients at risk. Dig Liver Dis. 2012;44(6):497-503. Liu S, Watcha D, Holodniy M, Goldhaber-Fiebert JD. Sofosbuvir-based treatment regimens for chronic, genotype 1 hepatitis C virus infection in US incarcerated populations: a cost-effectiveness analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161(8):546-553. Liu CH, Chen CY, Su WW, et al. Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir plus ribavirin for Child-Pugh B and Child-Pugh C hepatitis C virus- related cirrhosis. Clin Mol Hepatol [Internet]. 2021;27(4):575-588. https://doi.org/10.3350/cmh.2021.0155 Liu CH, Lin JW, Liu CJ, Su TH, Wu JH, Tseng TC, et al. Long-term Evolution of Estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate in Patients With Antiviral Treatment for Hepatitis C Virus Infection. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol [Internet]. 2022;(22):S1542-S3565. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cgh.2022.01.050 Llaneras J, Riveiro-Barciela M, Lens S, et al. Effectiveness and safety of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir in patients with chronic hepatitis C previously treated with DAAs. J Hepatol. 2019;71(4):666-672. Lo Re V, Kallan MJ, Tate JP, Localio AR, Lim JK, Goetz MB, et al. Hepatic decompensation in antiretroviral-treated patients co-infected with HIV and hepatitis C virus compared with hepatitis C virus-monoinfected patients: a cohort study. Ann Intern Med. 2014;160(6):369-379. Lo Re V, Gowda C, Urick PN, et al. Disparities in absolute denial of modern hepatitis C therapy by type of insurance. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016;14(7):1035-1043. Lockart I, Matthews GV, Danta M. Sexually transmitted hepatitis C infection: the evolving epidemic in HIV-positive and HIV-negative MSM. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2019;32(1):31-37. Logan DE, Marlatt GA. Harm reduction therapy: a practice-friendly review of research. J Clin Psychol. 2010;66(2):201-214. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 41 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Lok AS, McMahon BJ. Chronic hepatitis B: update 2009. Hepatology. 2009;50(3):661-662. Lok AS, Sulkowski MS, Kort JJ, et al. Efficacy of glecaprevir and pibrentasvir in patients with genotype 1 hepatitis C virus infection with treatment failure after NS5A inhibitor plus sofosbuvir therapy. Gastroenterology. 2020;157(6):1506-1517.e1. Louie KS, St Laurent S, Forssen UM, Mundy LM, Pimenta JM. The high comorbidity burden of the hepatitis C virus infected population in the United States. BMC Infect Dis. 2012;12:86. Lucas GM, Chaudhry A, Hsu J, et al. Clinic-based treatment of opioid-dependent HIV-infected patients versus referral to an opioid treatment program: A randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2010;152(11):704-711. Lucas GM, Ross MJ, Stock PG, et al. Clinical practice guideline for the management of chronic kidney disease in patients infected with HIV: 2014 update by the HIV Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 2014;59(9):1203-1207. Ly KN, Jiles RB, Teshale EH, Foster MA, Pesano RL, Holmberg SD. Hepatitis C virus infection among reproductive-aged women and children in the United States, 2006 to 2014. Ann of Intern Med. 2017;166(11):775-782. Lyons MS, Kunnathur VA, Rouster SD, et al. Prevalence of diagnosed and undiagnosed hepatitis C in a midwestern urban emergency department. Clin Infect Dis. 2016;62(9):10-71. Macalino GE, Vlahov D, Sanford-Colby S, et al. Prevalence and incidence of HIV, hepatitis B virus, and hepatitis C virus infections among males in Rhode Island prisons. Am J Public Health. 2004;94(7):1218-1223. MacBrayne CE, Castillo-Mancilla J, Burton, Jr JR, et al. Small increase in dolutegravir trough, but equivalent total dolutegravir exposure with simeprevir in HIV/HCV seronegative volunteers. Antimicrob Chemother. 2018;73(1):156-159. MacDonald R, Akiyama MJ, Kopolow A, et al. Feasibility of treating hepatitis C in a transient jail population. Open Forum Infect. 2017;4(3):ofx142. Macias J, Berenguer J, Japon MA, et al. Fast fibrosis progression between repeated liver biopsies in patients coinfected with human immunodeficiency virus/hepatitis C virus. Hepatology. 2009;50(4):1056-1063. Macías J, Marano LE, Tellez F, et al. Response to direct-acting antiviral therapy among ongoing drug users and people receiving opioid substitution therapy. J Hepatol. 2019;71(1):45-51. Mack CL, Gonzalez-Peralta RP, Gupta N, et al. NASPGHAN practice guidelines: diagnosis and management of hepatitis C infection in infants, children, and adolescents. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2012;54(6):838-855. Macneil J, Pauly B. Needle exchange as a safe haven in an unsafe world. Drug Alcohol Rev. 2011;30(1):26-32. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 42 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) S M, , P V, et al. Increasing multiorgan heart transplantation with hepatitis C virus donors in the current-era. J Heart Lung Transplant [Internet]. 2021;40(11):1382-1386. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healun.2021.05.018 Maddison AR, Fisher J, Johnston G. Preventive medication use among persons with limited life expectancy. Prog Palliat Care. 2011;19(1):15-21. Mahajan R, Liu SJ, Klevens RM, Holmberg SD. Indications for testing among reported cases of HCV infection from enhanced hepatitis surveillance sites in the United States, 2004-2010. Am J Public Health. 2013;103(8):1445-1449. Maher L, Jalaludin B, Chant KG, Jayasuriya R, Sladden T, Kaldor JM, et al. Incidence and risk factors for hepatitis C seroconversion in injecting drug users in Australia. Addiction. 2006;101(10):1499-1508. Mangia A, Milligan S, Khalili M, et al. Global real-world evidence of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir as a simple, effective regimen for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C patients: Integrated analysis of 12 clinical practice cohorts. International Liver Congress. Vienna, Austria; 2019. Mangia A, Milligan S, Khalili M, et al. Global real-world evidence of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir as simple, effective HCV treatment: analysis of 5552 patients from 12 cohorts. Liver Int. 2020;40(8):1841-1852. Manns MP, Pockros PJ, Norkrans G, Smith CI, Morgan TR, Haussinger D, et al. Long-term clearance of hepatitis C virus following interferon alpha-2b or peginterferon alpha-2b, alone or in combination with ribavirin. J Viral Hepat. 2013;20(8):524-529. Manns M, Samuel D, Gane EJ, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir plus ribavirin in patients with genotype 1 or 4 hepatitis C virus infection and advanced liver disease: a multicentre, open-label, randomised, phase 2 trial. Lancet Infect Dis. 2016;16(6):685-697. Mao L, Kippax SC, Holt M, Prestage GP, Zablotska IB, de Wit JBF. Rates of condom and non-condom-based anal intercourse practices among homosexually active men in Australia: deliberate HIV risk reduction?. Sex Transm Infect. 2011;87(6):489-493. Marcellin P, Boyer N, Gervais A, Martinot M, Pouteau M, Castelnau C, et al. Long-term histologic improvement and loss of detectable intrahepatic HCV RNA in patients with chronic hepatitis C and sustained response to interferon-alpha therapy. Ann Intern Med. 1997;127(10):875-881. Marco A, Esteban JI, Sole C, et al. Hepatitis C virus reinfection among prisoners with sustained virological response after treatment for chronic hepatitis C. J Hepatol. 2013;59(1):45-51. Marcus JL, Hurley LB, Chamberland S. No difference in effectiveness of 8 vs 12 weeks of ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for treatment of hepatitis C in black patients. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2018;16(6):927-935. Marrero JA, Kulik LM, Sirlin CB. Diagnosis, staging, and management of hepatocellular carcinoma: 2018 practice guidance by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases. Hepatology. 2018;68(2):723-750. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 43 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Marrie TJ, Tyrrell GJ, Garg S, Vanderkooi O. Factors predicting mortality in invasive pneumococcal disease in adults in Alberta. Medicine. 2011;90(3):171-179. Martin NK, Hickman M, Hutchinson SJ, Goldberg DJ, Vickerman P. Combination interventions to prevent HCV transmission among people who inject drugs: modeling the impact of antiviral treatment, needle and syringe programs, and opiate substitution therapy. Clin Infect Dis. 2013;57(Suppl 2):S39-S45. Martin NK, Hickman M, Hutchinson SJ, Goldberg DJ, Vickerman P. Combination interventions to prevent HCV transmission among people who inject drugs: modeling the impact of antiviral treatment, needle and syringe programs, and opiate substitution therapy. Clin Infect Dis. 2013;57(Suppl 2):S39-S45. Martin NK, Vickerman P, Grebely J, et al. Hepatitis C virus treatment for prevention among people who inject drugs: modeling treatment scale-up in the age of direct-acting antivirals. Hepatology. 2013;58(5):1598-1609. Martin NK, Vickerman P, Dore GJ, Hickman M. The hepatitis C virus epidemics in key populations (including people who inject drugs, prisoners and MSM): the use of direct-acting antivirals as treatment for prevention. Curr Opin HIV AIDS. 2015;10(5):374-380. Martin TCS, Singh GJ, McClure M, Nelson M. HCV reinfection among HIV-positive men who have sex with men: a pragmatic approach. Hepatology. 2015;61(4):1437-1437. Martin NK, Thornton A, Hickman M, et al. Can hepatitis C virus (HCV) direct-acting antiviral treatment as prevention reverse the HCV epidemic among men who have sex with men in the United Kingdom? Epidemiological and modeling insights. Clin Infect Dis. 2016 Feb 16.th ed. 2016;62(9):1072-1080. Martin NK, Vickerman P, Dore GJ, et al. Prioritization of HCV treatment in the directacting antiviral era: an economic evaluation. J Hepatol. 2016;65(1):17-25. Martinello M, Orkin C, Cooke G, et al. Short-duration pan-genotypic therapy with glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for 6 weeks among people with recent hepatitis C viral infection. Hepatology. 2020;72(1):7-18. Maruschak L, Chari KA, Simon AE, DeFrances CJ. National survey of prison health care: selected findings. Natl Health Stat Report. 2016;(96):1-23. Mast EE, Hwang L-Y, Seto DSY, et al. Risk factors for perinatal transmission of hepatitis C virus (HCV) and the natural history of HCV infection acquired in infancy. J Infect Dis. 2005;192(11):1880-1889. Mateu-Gelabert P, Sabounchi NS, Guarino H, et al. Hepatitis C virus risk among young people who inject drugs. Frontiers in Public Health. 2022;10:835836. Matheï C, Bourgeois S, Blach S, et al. Mitigating the burden of hepatitis C virus among people who inject drugs in HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 44 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Belgium. Acta Gastroenterol Belg. 2016;79(2):227-232. Matsuda T, McCombs JS, Tonnu-MiHara I, McGinnis J, Fox DS. The impact of delayed hepatitis C viral load suppression on patient risk: historical evidence from the Veterans Administration. Forum Health Econ Policy. 2016;19(2):333-351. Matthews GV, Hellard M, Kaldor J, Lloyd A, Dore GJ. Further evidence of HCV sexual transmission among HIV-positive men who have sex with men: response to Danta et al. AIDS. 2007;21(15):2112 - 2113. Matthews GV, Bhagani S, Van der Valk M, et al. Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir for 12 vs 6 weeks for the treatment of recently acquired hepatitis C infection. J Hepatol. 2021;S0168-8278(21):00336-6. Mattick RP, Breen C, Kimber J, Davoli M. Methadone maintenance therapy versus no opioid replacement therapy for opioid dependence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;(3):CD002209. Mattick RP, Breen C, Kimber J, Davoli M. Buprenorphine maintenance versus placebo or methadone maintenance for opioid dependence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;(2):CD002207. Maurer K, Gondles EF, Efeti D, Strom HV, Strom HV. Hepatitis C in correctional settings: challenges and opportunities. 2015;. Mazzaro C, Little D, Pozzato G. Regression of splenic lymphoma after treatment of hepatitis C virus infection. N Engl J Med. 2002;347(26):2168-2170. McCombs JS, Tonnu-MiHara I, Matsuda T, McGinnis J, Fox S. Can hepatitis C treatment be safely delayed? Evidence from the Veterans Administration healthcare system [PIN104]. Value Health. 2015;18(3):A245. McGovern BH, Birch CE, Bowen MJ, Reyor LL, Nagami EH, Chung RT, et al. Improving the diagnosis of acute hepatitis C virus infection with expanded viral load criteria. Clin Infect Dis. 2009;49(7):1051-1060. McGowan CE, Monis A, Bacon BR, Mallolas J, Goncales, Jr. FL, Goulis I, et al. A global view of hepatitis C: physician knowledge, opinions, and perceived barriers to care. Hepatology. 2013;57(4):1325-1332. McLean RC, Reese PP, Acker M, et al. Transplanting hepatitis C virus-infected hearts into uninfected recipients: A single- arm trial. Am J Transplant. 2019;19(9):2533-2542. Mehta SH, Brancati FL, Sulkowski MS, Strathdee SA, Szklo M, Thomas DL. Prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus among persons with hepatitis C virus infection in the United States. Ann Intern Med. 2000;133(8):592-599. Mehta SH, Lucas GM, Mirel LB, Torbenson M, Higgins Y, Moore RD, et al. Limited effectiveness of antiviral treatment for hepatitis C in an urban HIV clinic. AIDS. 2006;20(18):2361-2369. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 45 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Menon RM, Badri PS, Wang T, Polepally AR, Zha J, Khatri A, et al. Drug-drug interaction profile of the all-oral anti- hepatitis C virus regimen of paritaprevir/ritonavir, ombitasvir, and dasabuvir. J Hepatol. 2015;63(1):20-29. Mera J, Vellozzi C, Hariri S. Identification and clinical management of persons with chronic hepatitis C virus infection - Cherokee Nation, 2012-2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65(18):461-466. Merchante N, Giron-Gonzalez JA, Gonzalez-Serrano M, et al. Survival and prognostic factors of HIV-infected patients with HCV-related end-stage liver disease. AIDS. 2006;20(1):49-57. Mettikanont P, Bunchorntavakul C, Reddy KR. Systematic review: epidemiology and response to direct-acting antiviral therapy in genotype 6 chronic hepatitis C virus infection. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2019;49(5):492-505. Midgard H, Bramness JG, Skurtveit S, Haukeland JW, Dalgard O. Hepatitis C treatment uptake among patients who have received opioid substitution treatment: a population-based study. PloS One. 2016;11(11):e0166451. Midgard H, Bjøro B, Mæland A, et al. Hepatitis C reinfection after sustained virological response. J Hepatol. 2016;64(5):1020-1026. Miller L, Fluker SA, Osborn M, Liu X, Strawder A. Improving access to hepatitis C care for urban, underserved patients using a primary care-based hepatitis C clinic. J Natl Med Assoc. 2012;104(5-6):244-250. Minola E, Prati D, Suter F, et al. Age at infection affects the long-term outcome of transfusion-associated chronic hepatitis C. Blood. 2002;99(12):4588-4591. Minton TD, Zeng Z. Bureau of Justice Statistics. Jail inmates in 2015. 2016. Mira JA, Rivero-Juárez A, Lopez-Cortes LF, Giron-Gonzalez JA, Tellez F, Santos-Gil ID, et al.. Benefits from sustained virologic response to pegylated interferon plus ribavirin in HIV/hepatitis C virus-coinfected patients with compensated cirrhosis. Clin Infect Dis. 2013;56(11):1646-1653. Mizuochi T, Takano T, Yanagi T, et al. Epidemiologic features of 348 children with hepatitis C virus infection over a 30-year period: a nationwide survey in Japan. J Gastroenterol. 2018;53:419-426. Modi AA, Nazario H, Trotter JF, et al. Safety and efficacy of simeprevir plus sofosbuvir with or without ribavirin in patients with decompensated genotype 1 hepatitis C cirrhosis. Liver Transpl. 2016;22(3):281-286. Mogalian E, German P, Kearney BP, et al. Use of multiple probes to assess transporter- and cytochrome P450-mediated drug-drug interaction potential of the pangenotypic HCV NS5A inhibitor velpatasvir. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2016;55(5):605-613. Mogalian E, Stamm LM, Osinusi A, et al. Drug-drug interaction studies between hepatitis C virus antivirals sofosbuvir/velpatasvir and boosted and unboosted human immunodeficiency virus antiretroviral regimens in healthy HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 46 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) volunteers. Clin Infect Dis. 2018;56(6):934-940. Molnar MZ, Nair S, Cseprekal O, et al. Transplantation of kidneys from hepatitis C-infected donors to hepatitis C-negative recipients: single center experience. Am J Transplant. 2019;19(11):3046-3057. Molnar MZ, Azhar A, Tsujita M, et al. Transplantation of kidneys from hepatitis C virus-infected donors to hepatitis C virus- negative recipients: one-year kidney allograft outcomes. Am J Kidney Dis [Internet]. 2021;77(5):739-747. https://doi.org/10.1053/j.ajkd.2020.10.017 Moore BA, Barry DT, Sullivan LE, et al. Counseling and directly observed medication for primary care buprenorphine maintenance: a pilot study. J Addict Med. 2012;6(3):205-211. Morey S, Hamoodi A, Jones D, Young T. Increased diagnosis and treatment of hepatitis C in prison by universal offer of testing and use of telemedicine. J Viral Hepat. 2019;26(1):101-108. Morgan TR, Ghany MG, Kim HY, et al. Outcome of sustained virological responders with histologically advanced chronic hepatitis C. Hepatology. 2010;52(3):833-844. Morgan RL, Baack B, Smith BD, Yartel A, Pitasi M, Falck-Ytter Y. Eradication of hepatitis C virus infection and the development of hepatocellular carcinoma: a meta-analysis of observational studies. Ann Intern Med. 2013;158(5 Pt 1):329-337. Morisco F, Granata R, Stroffolini T, Guarino M, Donnarumma L, Gaeta L, et al. Sustained virological response: a milestone in the treatment of chronic hepatitis C. World J Gastroenterol. 2013;19(18):2793-2798. Morrill JA, Shrestha M, Grant RW. Barriers to the treatment of hepatitis C. Patient, provider, and system factors. J Gen Intern Med. 2005;20(8):754-758. Mosley JW, Operskalski EA, Tobler LH, et al. The course of hepatitis C viraemia in transfusion recipients prior to availability of antiviral therapy. J Viral Hepat. 2008;15(2):120-128. Moucari R, Asselah T, Cazals-Hatem D, et al. Insulin resistance in chronic hepatitis C: association with genotypes 1 and 4, serum HCV RNA level, and liver fibrosis. Gastroenterology. 2008;134:416-423. Moyer VA. Screening for HIV: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159(1):51-60. Moyer VA. Screening for hepatitis C virus infection in adults: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159(5):349-357. Mücke MM, Backus LI, Mücke VT. Hepatitis B virus reactivation during direct-acting antiviral therapy for hepatitis C: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2018;3(3):172-180. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 47 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Murphy SM, Dweik D, McPherson S, Roll JM. Association between hepatitis C virus and opioid use while in buprenorphine treatment: preliminary findings. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse. 2015;41(1):88-92. Murray KF, Balistreri WF, Bansal S, et al. Safety and efficacy of ledipasvir-sofosbuvir with or without ribavirin for chronic hepatitis C in children ages 6-11. Hepatology. 2018;68:2158-2166. Musso G, Gambino R, Cassader M, Pagano G. A meta-analysis of randomized trials for the treatment of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Hepatology. 2010;52(1):79-104. Myers JJ, Shade SB, Rose CDawson, Koester K, Maiorana A, Malitz FE, et al. Interventions delivered in clinical settings are effective in reducing risk of HIV transmission among people living with HIV: results from the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA)'s special projects of national significance initiative. AIDS Behav. 2010;14(3):483-492. Naganuma A, Chayama K, Notsumata K, et al. Integrated analysis of 8-week glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in Japanese and overseas patients without cirrhosis and with hepatitis C virus genotype 1 or 2 infection. J Gastroenterol. 2019;54(8):752-761. Naggie S, Cooper C, Saag M, Workowski K, Ruane PJ, Towner WJ, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for HCV in patients coinfected with HIV-1. N Engl J Med. 2015;373(8):705-713. Naggie S, Fierer DS, Hughes M, et al. 100% SVR with 8 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir in HIV-infected men with acute HCV infection: results from the SWIFT-C trial [abstract]. Hepatology. 2017;66(Suppl.):196. Naggie S, Fierer DS, Hughes MD, et al. Ledipasvir/sofosbuvir for 8 weeks to treat acute hepatitis C virus infections in men with human immunodeficiency virus infections: sofosbuvir-containing regimens without interferon for treatment of acute HCV in HIV-1 infected individuals. Clin Infect Dis. 2019;69(3):514-522. Najafzadeh M, Andersson K, Shrank WH, et al. Cost-effectiveness of novel regimens for the treatment of hepatitis C virus. Ann Intern Med. 2015;162(6):407-419. Nakano Y, Kiyosawa K, Sodeyama T, Tanaka E, Matsumoto A, Ichijo T, et al. Acute hepatitis C transmitted by needlestick accident despite short duration interferon treatment. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 1995;10(5):609-611. National Academies of Sciences, committee on a national strategy for the elimination of hepatitis B and C, board on population health and public health practice: a national strategy for the elimination of hepatitis B and C: phase two report. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2017. Nazario HE, Ndungu M, Modi AA. Sofosbuvir and simeprevir in hepatitis C genotype 1-patients with endstage renal disease on haemodialysis or GFR Neary MP, Cort S, Bayliss MS, Ware JE. Sustained virologic response is associated with improved health-related quality HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 48 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) of life in relapsed chronic hepatitis C patients. Semin Liver Dis. 1999;19(Suppl 1):77-85. Neate R. Welcome to Jail Inc: how private companies make money off US prisons. The Guardian. 2016;. Nelson PK, Mathers BM, Cowie B, Hagan H, Des Jarlais D, Horyniak D, et al. Global epidemiology of hepatitis B and hepatitis C in people who inject drugs: results of systematic reviews. Lancet. 2011;378(9791):571-583. Nelson DR, Cooper JN, Lalezari JP, et al. All-oral 12-week treatment with daclatasvir plus sofosbuvir in patients with hepatitis C virus genotype 3 infection: ALLY-3 phase III study. Lawitz EJ, Pockros PJ, Gitlin N, Freilich BF, Younes ZH, Harlan W, et al. Hepatology. 2015;61(4):1127-1135. Neumann UP, Berg T, Bahra M, Seehofer D, Langrehr JM, Neuhaus R, et al. Fibrosis progression after liver transplantation in patients with recurrent hepatitis C. J Hepatol. 2004;41(5):830-836. Newsum AM, Stolte IG, van der Meer JTM. Development and validation of the HCV-MOSAIC risk score to assist testing for acute hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection in HIV-infected men who have sex with men (MSM). Euro Surveill. 2017;22(21):30540. Ng T, Lu L, Reisch T, et al. Resistance selection using glecaprevir and pibrentasvir in replicons of major hepatitis C virus genotypes. Krishnan P, Schnell G, Tripathi R, Beyer J, Dekhtyar T, Irvin M, et al. J Hepatol. 2017;66(1):S324. Ng TI, Krishnan P, Pilot-Matias T, et al. In vitro antiviral activity and resistance profile of the next-generation hepatitis C virus NS5A inhibitor pibrentasvir. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2017;61(5):pii: e02558-16. Nguyen MH, Trinh H, Do S, Nguyen T, Nguyen P, Henry L. Open label study of 8 vs. 12 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir in genotype 6 treatment naïve or experienced patients. Am J Gastroenterol. 2017;112(12):1824-1831. Nguyen E, Trinh S, Trinh H, et al. Sustained virologic response rates in patients with chronic hepatitis C genotype 6 treated with ledipasvir+sofosbuvir or sofosbuvir+velpatasvir. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2019;49(1):99-106. Nguyen J, Barritt AS, Jhaveri R. Cost effectiveness of early treatment with direct-acting antiviral therapy in adolescent patients with hepatitis C infection. J Pediatr. 2019;(207):90-96. ChemSex and hepatitis C: a guide for healthcare providers. [Internet]. Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, NHS Foundation Trust website. Accessed June 13, 2019. 2014 . https://www.chelwest.nhs.uk/services/hiv-sexual- health/professionals/links/ChemSex-Hep-C-Guide.pdf Nielsen J, Christensen VB, Borgwardt L, Rasmussen A, Ostrup O, Kjaer MS. Prognostic molecular markers in pediatric liver disease - Are there any?. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis. 2019;(1865):577-586. Noda K, Yoshihara H, Suzuki K, Yamada Y, Kasahara A, Hayashi N, et al. Progression of type C chronic hepatitis to liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma--its relationship to alcohol drinking and the age of transfusion. Alcohol Clin Exp HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 49 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Res. 1996;20(1 Suppl):95A-100A. Nolan S, DiasLima V, Fairbairn N, et al. The impact of methadone maintenance therapy on hepatitis C incidence among illicit drug users. Addiction. 2014;109(12):2053-2059. Norton BL, Fleming J, Bachhuber MA, et al. High HCV cure rates for people who use drugs treated with direct acting antiviral therapy at an urban primary care clinic. Steinman M, DeLuca J, Cunningham CO, Johnson N, Laraque F, Litwin AH. Int J Drug Policy. 2017;47:196-201. Nutt AK, Hassan HA, Lindsey J, Lamps LW, Raufman JP. Liver biopsy in the evaluation of patients with chronic hepatitis C who have repeatedly normal or near-normal serum alanine aminotransferase levels. Am J Med. 2000;109(1):62-64. O'Brien TR, Lang Kuhs KA, Pfeiffer RM. Subgroup differences in response to 8 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir for chronic hepatitis C. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2014;1(3):ofu110. O'Connor PG, Oliveto AH, Shi JM, et al. A randomized trial of buprenorphine maintenance for heroin dependence in a primary care clinic for substance users versus a methadone clinic. Am J Med. 1998;105(2):100-105. O'Leary JG, Fontana RJ, Brown K, et al. Efficacy and safety of simeprevir and sofosbuvir with and without ribavirin in subjects with recurrent genotype 1 hepatitis C postorthotopic liver transplant: the randomized GALAXY study. Burton, Jr JR, Firpi-Morell R, Muir A, O'Brien C, Rabinovitz M, Reddy R, et al. Transpl Int. 2017;30(2):196 - 208. Kosloski MP, Dutta S, Ding B, et al. Interactions between ABT-493 plus ABT-530 combination and rilpivirine or raltegravir [poster #453]. Oberoi RK, Hu B, Wang S, Kort J, Liu W. Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections. Boston, MA; 2016. Olysio [package insert]. Titusville, NJ: Janssen Therapeutics; 2017. Ortiz V, Berenguer M, Rayon JM, Carrasco D, Berenguer J. Contribution of obesity to hepatitis C-related fibrosis progression. Am J Gastroenterol. 2002;97(9):2408-2414. Osinusi A, Kohli A, Marti MM, Nelson A, Zhang X, Meissner EG, et al. Re-treatment of chronic hepatitis C virus genotype 1 infection after relapse: an open-label pilot study. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161(9):634-638. Osinusi A, Townsend K, Kohli A, Nelson A, Seamon C, Meissner EG, et al. Virologic response following combined ledipasvir and sofosbuvir administration in patients with HCV genotype 1 and HIV coinfection. JAMA. 2015;313(12):1232-1239. Ouwerkerk-Mahadevan S, Snoeys J, Peeters M, Beumont-Mauviel M, Simion A. Drug-drug interactions with the NS3/4A protease inhibitor simeprevir. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2016;55(2):197-208. Owens DK, Davidson KW, Krist AH, et al. US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for hepatitis C virus infection in HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 50 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) adolescents and adults: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. JAMA. 2020;. Page EE, Nelson M. Hepatitis C and sex. Clin Med (Lond). 2016;16(2):189-192. Pageaux GP, Nzinga CL, Ganne N, Ganne N. Clinical outcomes after treatment with direct antiviral agents: beyond the virological response in patients with previous HCV-related decompensated cirrhosis. BMC Infect Dis [Internet]. 2022;22(1):94. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-022-07076-0 Pakianathan M, Whittaker W, Lee M, et al. Chemsex and new HIV diagnosis in gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men attending sexual health clinics. HIV Med. 2018;19(7):485-490. Papaluca T, Roberts SK, Strasser SI, et al. Efficacy and safety of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir for HCV NS5A- inhibitor experienced patients with difficult to cure characteristics. Clin Infect Dis. 2020;:ciaa1318. Online ahead if print. Papaluca T, Roberts SK, SI S, et al. Efficacy and Safety of Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir/Voxilaprevir for Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) NS5A-Inhibitor Experienced Patients With Difficult to Cure Characteristics. Clin Infect Dis [Internet]. 2021;73(9):e3288-e3295. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa1318 Park H, Chen C, Wang W, Henry L, Cook RL, Nelson DR. Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) increases the risk of chronic kidney disease (CKD) while effective HCV treatment decreases the incidence of CKD. Hepatology [Internet]. 2018;67(2):492-504. https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.29505 Patel S, Andres J, Qureshi K. An unexpected interaction between sofosbuvir/ledipasvir and atorvastatin and colchicine causing rhabdomyolysis in a patient with impaired renal function. Case Rep Med. 2016;2016:3191089. Patel S, Martin MT, Flamm SL. Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir for hepatitis C virus retreatment in decompensated cirrhosis. Liver Int [Internet]. 2021;41(12):3024–3027. https://doi.org/10.1111/liv.15075 Pavone P, Tieghi T, d'Ettorre G, et al. Rapid decline of fasting glucose in HCV diabetic patients treated with direct-acting antiviral agents. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2016;22(462):e461-463. Pawlotsky JM. Use and interpretation of virological tests for hepatitis C. Hepatology. 2002;36(5 Suppl 1):S65-S73. Pawlotsky J-M. Hepatitis C virus resistance to direct-acting antiviral drugs in interferon-free regimens. Gastroenterology. 2016;151(1):70-86. Pearlman B, Perrys M, Hinds A. Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir for previous treatment failures with glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in chronic hepatitis C infection. Am J Gastroenterol. San Francisco, CA; 2019;114(9):1550-1552. Petta S, Camma C, di Marco V, et al. Insulin resistance and diabetes increase fibrosis in the liver of patients with genotype 1 HCV infection. Alessi N, Cabibi D, Caldarella R, Licata A, Massenti F, Tarantino G, et al. Am J Gastroenterol. 2008;103(5):1136-1144. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 51 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Petta S, Camma C, DiMarco V, et al. Hepatic steatosis and insulin resistance are associated with severe fibrosis in patients with chronic hepatitis caused by HBV or HCV infection. Liver Int. 2011;31:507-515. Petta S, Maida M, Macaluso FS, et al. Hepatitis C virus infection is associated with increased cardiovascular mortality: a meta-analysis of observational studies. Barbara M, Licata A, Craxi A, Camma C. Gastroenterology. 2015 Sep 18th ed. 2016;150(1):145-155.e4. Pianko S, Flamm SL, Shiffman ML, et al. Sofosbuvir plus velpatasvir combination therapy for treatment-experienced patients with genotype 1 or 3 hepatitis C virus infection: a randomized trial. Kumar S, Strasser SI, Dore GJ, McNally J, Brainard DM, Han L, et al. Ann Intern Med. 2015;163(11):809-817. Picciotto FP, Tritto G, Lanza AG, Addario L, De LM, Di Costanzo GG, et al. Sustained virological response to antiviral therapy reduces mortality in HCV reinfection after liver transplantation. J Hepatol. 2007;46(3):459-465. Pineda JA, Romero-Gomez M, Díaz-García F, et al. HIV coinfection shortens the survival of patients with hepatitis C virus- related decompensated cirrhosis. Giron-Gonzalez JA, Montero JL, Torre-Cisneros J, Andrade RJ, Gonzalez-Serrano M, Aguilar J, et al. Hepatology. 2005;41(4):779-789. Platt L, Minozzi S, Reed J, Vickerman P, Hagan H, French C, et al. Needle syringe programmes and opioid substitution therapy for preventing hepatitis C transmission in people who inject drugs. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews [Internet]. 2017;9(9). https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD012021.pub2 Pokorska-Spiewak M, Kowalik-Mikolajewska B, Aniszewska M, Pluta M, Marczynska M. Clinical usefulness of new noninvasive serum biomarkers for the assessment of liver fibrosis and steatosis in children with chronic hepatitis C. Clin Exp Hepatol. 2017;3:198-202. Pol S, Bourliere M, Lucier S, et al. Safety and efficacy of daclatasvir-sofosbuvir in HCV genotype 1-mono-infected patients. Hézode C, Dorival C, Larrey D, Bronowicki J-P, Ledinghen VDE, Zoulim F, et al. J Hepatol. 2017;66(1):39-47. Poordad F, Hézode C, Trinh R, et al. ABT-450/r-ombitasvir and dasabuvir with ribavirin for hepatitis C with cirrhosis. Kowdley KV, Zeuzem S, Agarwal K, Shiffman ML, Wedemeyer H, Berg T, et al. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(21):1973-1982. Poordad F, Schiff ER, Vierling JM, Landis C, Fontana RJ, Yang R, et al. Daclatasvir with sofosbuvir and ribavirin for hepatitis C virus infection with advanced cirrhosis or post-liver transplantation recurrence. Hepatology. 2016;63(5):1493 - 1505. Poordad F, Felizarta F, Asatryan A, et al. Glecaprevir and pibrentasvir for 12 weeks for hepatitis C virus genotype 1 infection and prior direct-acting antiviral treatment. Sulkowski MS, Reindollar RW, Landis CS, Gordon SC, Flamm SL, Fried MW, et al. Hepatology. 2017;66(2):389-397. Poordad F, Pol S, Asatryan A, et al. MAGELLAN-1, part 2: glecaprevir and pibrentasvir for 12 or 16 weeks in patients with chronic HCV genotype 1 or 4 and prior direct-acting antiviral treatment failure. Buti M, Shaw DR, Hezode C, Lalezari J, HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 52 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Felizarta F, Reindollar R, et al. Gastroenterology. 2017;152(5):S1057. Poordad F, Pol S, Asatryan A, et al. Glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in patients with hepatitis C virus genotype 1 or 4 and past direct-acting antiviral treatment failure. Hepatology. 2018;67(4):1260. Post JJ, Arain A, Lloyd AR. Enhancing assessment and treatment of hepatitis C in the custodial setting. Clin Infect Dis. 2013;57(Suppl 2):S70-S74. Potluri VS, Goldberg DS, Mohan S, Bloom RD, Sawinski D, Abt PL, et al. National trends in utilization and 1-year outcomes with transplantation of HCV-viremic kidneys. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2019;30:1939-1951. Poynard T, Bedossa P, Opolon P. Natural history of liver fibrosis progression in patients with chronic hepatitis C. The OBSVIRC, METAVIR, CLINIVIR, and DOSVIRC groups. Lancet. 1997;349(9055):825-832. Poynard T, Ratziu V, Charlotte F, Goodman Z, McHutchison JG, Albrecht J. Rates and risk factors of liver fibrosis progression in patients with chronic hepatitis C. J Hepatol. 2001;34(5):730-739. Poynard T, Cacoub P, Ratziu V, Myers RP, Dezailles MH, Mercadier A, et al. Fatigue in patients with chronic hepatitis C. J Viral Hepat. 2002;9(4):295-303. Poynard T, McHutchison JG, Manns M, Trepo C, Lindsay K, Goodman Z, et al. Impact of pegylated interferon alfa-2b and ribavirin on liver fibrosis in patients with chronic hepatitis C. Gastroenterology. 2002;122(5):1303-1313. Pradat P, Alberti A, Poynard T, Esteban JI, Weiland O, Marcellin P, et al. Predictive value of ALT levels for histologic findings in chronic hepatitis C: a European collaborative study. Hepatology. 2002;36(4 Pt 1):973-977. Prasad MR. Hepatitis C virus screening in pregnancy: is it time to change our practice?. Obstet Gynecol. 2016;128(2):229-230. Prenner SB, VanWagner LB, Flamm SL, Salem R, Lewandowski RJ, Kulik L. Hepatocellular carcinoma decreases the chance of successful hepatitis C virus therapy with direct-acting antivirals. J Hepatol. 2017;66(6):1173-1181. Price JC, McKinney JE, Crouch PC, et al. Sexually acquired hepatitis C infection in HIV-uninfected men who have sex with men using preexposure prophylaxis against HIV. J Infect Dis. 2019;219(9):1373-1376. Proeschold-Bell RJ, Patkar AA, Naggie S, Coward L, Mannelli P, Yao J, et al. An integrated alcohol abuse and medical treatment model for patients with hepatitis C. Dig Dis Sci. 2012;57(4):1083-1091. Pufall EL, Kallan MJ, Shahmanesh M, et al, et al. Sexualized drug use ('chemsex') and high-risk sexual behaviours in HIV- positive men who have sex with men. HIV Med. 2018;19(4):261-270. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 53 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Puljic A, Salati J, Doss A, Caughey AB. Outcomes of pregnancies complicated by liver cirrhosis, portal hypertension, or esophageal varices. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2016;29(3):506-509. Pungpapong S, Aqel B, Leise M, et al. Multicenter experience using simeprevir and sofosbuvir with or without ribavirin to treat hepatitis C genotype 1 after liver transplant. Hepatol. 2015;61(6):1880-1886. Puoti M, Lorenzini P, Cozzi-Lepri A, et al. Incidence and progression to cirrhosis of new hepatitis C virus infections in persons living with human immunodeficiency virus. Gori A, Mastroianni C, Rizzardini G, Mazzarello G, Antinori A, Monforte Ad'Arminio, et al. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2017;23(4):267.e1-267.e4. Puoti M, Foster GR, Wang S, et al. High SVR12 with 8-week and 12-week glecaprevir/pibrentasvir therapy: An integrated analysis of HCV genotype 1-6 patients without cirrhosis. J Hepatol. 2018;69(2):293-300. Ramirez G, Cabral R, Patterson M, et al. Early identification and linkage to care for people with chronic HBV and HCV infection: the HepTLC initiative. Public Health Rep. 2016;131(Suppl 2):5-11. Reau N, Kwo PY, Rhee S, et al. Glecaprevir/pibrentasvir treatment in liver or kidney transplant patients with hepatitis C virus infection. Hepatology. 2018;68(4):1298-1307. Reddy KR, Bourliere M, Sulkowski MS, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir in patients with genotype 1 hepatitis C virus infection and compensated cirrhosis: An integrated safety and efficacy analysis. Omata M, Zeuzem S, Feld JJ, Lawitz EJ, Marcellin P, Welzel TM, et al. Hepatology. 2015;62(1):79-86. Reddy KR, Pol S, Thuluvath PJ. Long-term follow-up of clinical trial patients treated for chronic HCV infection with daclatasvir-based regimens. Liver Int. 2018;38(5):821-833. Reese PP, Abt PL, Blumberg EA, et al. Twelve-month outcomes after transplant of hepatitis C-infected kidneys into uninfected recipients: a single-group trial. Ann Intern Med. 2018;169(5):273-281. Regev A, Berho M, Jeffers LJ, Milikowski C, Molina EG, Pyrsopoulos NT, et al. Sampling error and intraobserver variation in liver biopsy in patients with chronic HCV infection. Am J Gastroenterol. 2002;97(10):2614-2618. Reig M, Mariño Z, Perelló C, et al. Unexpected high rate of early tumor recurrence in patients with HCV-related HCC undergoing interferon-free therapy. Iñarrairaegui M, Ribeiro A, Lens S, Díaz A, Vilana R, Darnell A, et al. J Hepatol. 2016;65(4):719-726. Reilley B, Leston J, Redd JT, Geiger R. Lack of access to treatment as a barrier to HCV screening: a facility-based assessment in the Indian Health Service. J Public Health Manag Pract. 2014;20(4):420-423. Rein DB, Wittenborn JS, Smith BD, et al. The cost-effectiveness, health benefits, and financial costs of new antiviral treatments for hepatitis C virus. Clin Infect Dis. 2015;61(2):157-168. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 54 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Resti M, Azzari C, Mannelli F, Moriondo M, Novembre E, de Martino M, et al. Mother to child transmission of hepatitis C virus: prospective study of risk factors and timing of infection in children born to women seronegative for HIV-1. Tuscany study group on hepatitis C virus infection. BMJ. 1998;317(7156):437-441. Resti M, Jara P, Hierro L, et al. Clinical features and progression of perinatally acquired hepatitis C virus infection. J Med Virol. 2003;70:373-377. Reyentovich A, Gidea CG, Smith D, et al. Outcomes of the treatment with glecaprevir/pibrentasvir following heart transplantation utilizing hepatitis C viremic donors. Clin Transplant. 2020;34(9):e13989. Rich JD, Allen SA, Williams BA. Responding to hepatitis C through the criminal justice system. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(20):1871-1874. Rich JD, Chandler R, Williams BA, et al. How health care reform can transform the health of criminal justice-involved individuals. Dumont D, Wang EA, Taxman FS, Allen SA, Clarke JG, Greifinger RB, et al. Health Aff (Millwood). 2014;33(3):462-467. Richardson JL, Milam J, McCutchan A, Stoyanoff S, Bolan R, Weiss J, et al. Effect of brief safer-sex counseling by medical providers to HIV-1 seropositive patients: a multi-clinic assessment. AIDS. 2004;18(8):1179-1186. Rindone JP, Mellen CK. Reduction in warfarin effect associated with sofosbuvir-velpatasvir. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2017;(74):1308-1311. Rockey DC, Bissell DM. Noninvasive measures of liver fibrosis. Hepatology. 2006;43(2 Suppl 1):S113-S120. Rockstroh JK, Nelson M, Katlama C, et al. Efficacy and safety of grazoprevir (MK-5172) and elbasvir (MK- 8742) in patients with hepatitis C virus and HIV co-infection (C-EDGE CO-INFECTION): a non-randomised, open-label trial. Lancet HIV. 2015;2(8):e319-327. Rockstroh J, Lacombe K, Viani RM, Orkin C, Wyles D, Luetkemeyer A, et al. Efficacy and safety of Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir in patients co-infected with hepatitis C virus and human immunodeficiency virus-1: the EXPEDITION-2 Study [Abstract LBP-522]. In The International Liver Congress. EASL [Internet]. 2017. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0168-8278(17)30467-1 Rockstroh JK, Bhagani S, Hyland RH, et al. Ledipasvir-sofosbuvir for 6 weeks to treat acute hepatitis C virus genotype 1 or 4 infection in patients with HIV coinfection: an open-label, single-arm trial. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017;2(5):347-353. Rockstroh JK, Lacombe K, Viani RM, et al. Efficacy and safety of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in patients coinfected with hepatitis C virus and human immunodeficiency virus type 1: the EXPEDITION-2 study. Clin Infect Dis. 2018;67(7):1010-1017. Rodriguez-Torres M, Gaggar A, Shen G, et al. Sofosbuvir for chronic hepatitis C virus infection genotype 1-4 in patients HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 55 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) coinfected with HIV. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2015;68(5):543-549. Rogal SS, Yan P, Rimland D, et al. Electronically retrieved cohort of HCV infected veterans study group. Incidence and progression of chronic kidney disease after hepatitis C seroconversion: results from ERCHIVES. Dig Dis Sci. 2016;61(3):930-936. Rosenthal P, Schwarz KB, Gonzalez-Peralta RP, et al. Sofosbuvir and ribavirin therapy for children aged 3 to Rosenthal P, Schwarz KB, Gonzalez-Peralta RP, et al. Sofosbuvir and ribavirin therapy for children aged 3 to Rossaro L, Torruellas C, Dhaliwal S, et al. Clinical outcomes of hepatitis C treated with pegylated interferon and ribavirin via telemedicine consultation in Northern California. Botros J, Clark G, Li CS, Minoletti MM. Dig Dis Sci. 2013;58(12):3620-3625. Roth D, Nelson DR, Bruchfeld A, et al. Grazoprevir plus elbasvir in treatment-naive and treatment experienced patients with hepatitis C virus genotype 1 infection and stage 4-5 chronic kidney disease (the C-SURFER study): a combination phase 3 study. Lancet. 2015;386(10003):1537-1545. Rudd RA, Seth P, David F, Scholl L. Increases in drug and opioid-involved overdose deaths - United States, 2010-2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65(5051):1445-1452. Ruiz JD, Molitor F, Sun RK, Mikanda J, Facer M, Colford JM, et al. Prevalence and correlates of hepatitis C virus infection among inmates entering the California correctional system. West J Med. 1999;170(3):156-160. Saadoun D, M R-R, Thibault V, et al. PegIFNa/ribavirin/protease inhibitor combination in hepatitis C virus associated mixed cryoglobulinemia vasculitis: results at week 24. Longuet M, Pol S, Blanc F, Pialoux G, Karras A, Bazin-Karra D, et al. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014;73(5):831-837. Saag MS. Editorial commentary: getting smart in how we pay for HCV drugs: KAOS vs CONTROL. Clin Infect Dis. 2015;61(2):169-170. Safdar K, Schiff ER. Alcohol and hepatitis C. Semin Liver Dis. 2004;24(3):305-315. Sageshima J, Troppmann C, McVicar JP, Santhanakrishnan C, deMattos AM, Perez RV. Impact of willingness to accept hepatitis C seropositive kidneys among hepatitis C RNA-positive waitlisted patients. Transplantation. 2018;(102):1179-1187. Salazar-Vizcaya L, Kouyos RD, Zahnd C, et al, et al. Hepatitis C virus transmission among human immunodeficiency virus- infected men who have sex with men: modeling the effect of behavioral and treatment interventions. Hepatology. 2016;64(6):1856-1869. Samandari T, Tedaldi E, Armon C, et al. Incidence of hepatitis C virus infection in the human immunodeficiency virus HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 56 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) outpatient study cohort, 2000-2013. Hart R, Chmiel JS, Brooks JT, Buchacz K, Investigators andthe HIVOu. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2017;4(2):ofx076. Information sheet on naltrexone therapy [Internet]. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration; 2019. https://www.samhsa.gov/medication-assisted-treatment/treatment/naltrexone Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Medication-assisted treatment, naltrexone [Internet]. 2020. https://www.samhsa.gov/medication-assisted-treatment/medications-counseling-related-conditions/naltrexone Sangiovanni A, Prati GM, Fasani P, Ronchi G, Romeo R, Manini M, et al. The natural history of compensated cirrhosis due to hepatitis C virus: a 17-year cohort study of 214 patients. Hepatology. 2006;43(6):1303-1310. Sarkar S, Jiang Z, Evon DM, Wahed AS, Hoofnagle JH. Fatigue before, during and after antiviral therapy of chronic hepatitis C: results from the Virahep-C study. J Hepatol. 2012;57(5):946-952. Sarrazin C, Dvory-Sobol H, Svarovskaia ES, et al. Prevalence of resistance-associated substitutions in HCV NS5A, NS5B, or NS3 and outcomes of treatment with ledipasvir and sofosbuvir. Doehle BP, Pang PS, Chuang SM, Ma J, Ding X, Afdhal NH, et al. Gastroenterology. 2016 June 11th ed. 2016;151(3):501-512.E1. Sarrazin C, Isakov V, Svarovskaia ES. Late relapse versus hepatitis C virus reinfection in patients with sustained virologic response after sofosbuvir-based therapies. Clin Infect Dis. 2017;64(1):44-52. Sarrazin C, Cooper CL, Manns MP, et al. No impact of resistance-associated substitutions on the efficacy of sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir for 12 weeks in HCV DAA-experienced patients. J Hepatol. 2018;69(6):1221-1230. Sawinski D, Kaur N, Ajeti A, et al. Successful treatment of hepatitis C in renal transplant recipients with direct-acting antiviral agents. Am J Transplant. 2016;16(5):1588-1595. Sawinski D, Forde KA, Lo Re V, et al. Mortality and kidney transplantation outcomes among hepatitis C virus-seropositive maintenance dialysis patients: a retrospective cohort study. Am J Kidney Dis. 2019;73:815-826. Saxena V, Koraishy FM, Sise ME, et al. HCV-TARGET. Safety and efficacy of sofosbuvir-containing regimens in hepatitis C-infected patients with impaired renal function. Liver Int. 2016 March 24th ed. 2016;36(6):807-816. Saxena V, Khungar V, Verna EC, et al. Safety and efficacy of current DAA regimens in kidney and liver transplant recipients with hepatitis C: results from the HCV-TARGET study. Hepatology. 2017;66(4):1090-1101. Sayiner M, Golabi P, Farhat F, Younossi ZM. Dermatologic manifestations of chronic hepatitis C infection. Clin Liver Dis. 2017;21(3):555-564. Scalea J, Barth RN, Munivenkatappa R, Philosophe B, Cooper M, Whitlow V, et al. Shorter waitlist times and improved graft survivals are observed in patients who accept hepatitis C virus+ renal allografts. Transplantation. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 57 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) 2015;99:1192-1196. Schackman BR, Leff JA, Barter DM, et al. Cost-effectiveness of rapid hepatitis C virus (HCV) testing and simultaneous rapid HCV and HIV testing in substance abuse treatment programs. Addiction. 2015;110(1):129-143. Schackman BR, Gutkind S, Morgan JR, et al. Cost-effectiveness of hepatitis C screening and treatment linkage intervention in US methadone maintenance treatment programs. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2018;(185):411-420. Schechter-Perkins EM, Miller NS, Hall J, et al. Implementation and preliminary results of an emergency department nontargeted, opt-out hepatitis C virus screening program. Acad Emerg Med. 2018;25(11):1226. Schillie S, Wester C, Osborne M, Wesolowski L, Ryerson AB. CDC recommendations for hepatitis C screening among adults - United States, 2020. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2020;69(2):1-17. Schlendorf KH, Zalawadiya S, Shah AS, et al. Expanding heart transplant in the era of direct-acting antiviral therapy for hepatitis C. JAMA Cardiol [Internet]. 2020;5(2):167-174. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamacardio.2019.4748 Schmidt AJ, Rockstroh JK, Vogel M, der Heiden MAn, Baillot A, Krznaric I, et al. Trouble with bleeding: risk factors for acute hepatitis C among HIV-positive gay men from Germany--a case-control study. Jin X. PLoS ONE. 2011;6(3):e17781. Schmidt AJ, Falcato L, Zahno B, et al. Prevalence of hepatitis C in a Swiss sample of men who have sex with men: whom to screen for HCV infection?. BMC Public Health. 2014;14(1):3. Schneider MD, Sarrazin C. Antiviral therapy of hepatitis C in 2014: do we need resistance testing?. Antiviral Res. 2014;105:64-71. Schoenbachler BT, Smith BD, Sena AC, et al. Hepatitis C virus testing and linkage to care in North Carolina and South Carolina jails, 2012-2014. Hilton A, Bachman S, Lunda M, Spaulding AC. Public Health Rep. 2016;131(Suppl 2):98-104. Schulkind J, Stephens B, Ahmad F, et al. High response and re-infection rates among people who inject drugs treated for hepatitis C in a community needle and syringe programme. J Viral Hepat. 2019;26(5):519-528. Schwarz KB, Rosenthal P, Murray KF, et al. Ledipasvir-sofosbuvir for 12 weeks in children 3 to Sebastiani G, Halfon P, Castera L, Pol S, Thomas DL, Mangia A, et al. SAFE biopsy: a validated method for large-scale staging of liver fibrosis in chronic hepatitis C. Hepatology. 2009;49(6):1821-1827. Seem DL, Lee I, Umscheid CA, Kuehnert MJ. Excerpt from PHS guideline for reducing HIV, HBV and HCV transmission through organ transplantation. Am J Transplant. 2013;13(8):1953-1962. Seem DL, Lee I, Umscheid CA, Kuehnert MJ. PHS guideline for reducing human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 58 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) virus, and hepatitis C virus transmission through organ transplantation. Public Health Rep. 2013;128(4):247-343. Selph S, Chou R. Impact of contacting study authors on systematic review conclusions: diagnostic tests for hepatic fibrosis. 2014. Selvapatt N, Ward T, Bailey H, et al. Is antenatal screening for hepatitis C virus cost-effective? A decade's experience at a London centre. Bennett H, Thorne C, See L-M, Tudor-Williams G, Thursz M, McEwan P, et al. J Hepatology. 2015;63(4):797-804. Shaw K, Gennat H, O'Rourke P, DelMar C. Exercise for overweight or obesity. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006;18(4):CD003817. Shebl FM, El-Kamary SS, Saleh D'aA, et al. Prospective cohort study of mother-to-infant infection and clearance of hepatitis C in rural Egyptian villages. Abdel-Hamid M, Mikhail N, Allam A, El-Arabi H, Elhenawy I, El-Kafrawy S, et al. J Med Virol. 2009;81(6):1024-1031. Shelton BA, Sawinski D, Mehta S, Reed RD, MacLennan PA, Locke JE. Kidney transplantation and waitlist mortality rates among candidates registered as willing to accept a hepatitis C infected kidney. Transpl Infect Dis. 2018;20:e12829. Shiffman RN, Shekelle P, Overhage JM, Slutsky J, Grimshaw J, Deshpande AM. Standardized reporting of clinical practice guidelines: a proposal from the Conference on Guideline Standardization. Ann Intern Med. 2003;139(6):493-498. Simmons B, Saleem J, Hill A, Riley RD, Cooke GS. Risk of late relapse or reinfection with hepatitis C virus after achieving a sustained virological response: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Infect Dis. 2016;62(6):683-694. Singal AG, Volk ML, Jensen D, Di Bisceglie AM, Schoenfeld PS. A sustained viral response is associated with reduced liver-related morbidity and mortality in patients with hepatitis C virus. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010;8(3):280-288, 288e1. Sise ME, Bloom AK, Wisocky J, et al. Treatment of hepatitis C virus-associated mixed cryoglobulinemia with direct-acting antiviral agents. Lin MV, Gustafson JL, Lundquist AL, Steele D, Thiim M, Williams WW, et al. Hepatology. 2016;63(2):408-417. Sise ME, Chute DF, Oppong Y, et al. Direct-acting antiviral therapy slows kidney function decline in patients with Hepatitis C virus infection and chronic kidney disease. Kidney Int. 2020;97(1):193-201. Sise ME, Goldberg DS, Kort JJ, et al. Multicenter study to transplant hepatitis C-infected kidneys (MYTHIC): an open- label study of combined glecaprevir and pibrentasvir to treat recipients of transplanted kidneys from deceased donors with hepatitis C virus infection. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2020;31(11):2678-2687. Sise ME, Goldberg DS, Schaubel DE, et al. One-year outcomes of the multi-center study to transplant hepatitis C-infected kidneys (MYTHIC) Trial. Kidney Int Rep [Internet]. 2021;7(2):241-250. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ekir.2021.11.022 HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 59 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) El-Sadr WM, Lundgren JD, Neaton JD, et al, Smart-Study-Group . CD4+ count-guided interruption of antiretroviral treatment. Gordin F, Abrams D, Arduino RC, Babiker A, Burman W, Clumeck N, et al. N Engl J Med. 2006;355(22):2283-2296. Smith BD, Morgan RL, Beckett GA, et al, et al. Recommendations for the identification of chronic hepatitis C virus infection among persons born during 1945-1965. Falck-Ytter Y, Holtzman D, Teo CG, Jewett A, Baack B, Rein DB, et al. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2012;61(RR-4):1-32. Smith BD, Morgan RL, Beckett GA, Falck-Ytter Y, Holtzman D, Ward JW. Hepatitis C virus testing of persons born during 1945-1965: recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157(11):817-822. Smith BD, Jewett A, Burt RD, Zibbell JE, Yartel AK, DiNenno E. "To share or not to share?" Serosorting by hepatitis C status in the sharing of drug injection equipment among NHBS-IDU2 participants. J Infect Dis. 2013;208(12):1934-1942. Smith DE, Chen S, Fargnoli A, et al. Impact of early initiation of direct-acting antiviral therapy in thoracic organ transplantation from hepatitis C virus positive donors. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2021;33(2):407-415. Smith DA, Bradshaw D, Mbisa JL, et al. Real world SOF/VEL/VOX retreatment outcomes and viral resistance analysis for HCV patients with prior failure to DAA therapy. J Viral Hepat [Internet]. 2021;28(9):1256-1264. https://doi.org/10.1111/jvh.13549 Smolders EJ, Colbers EP, de Kanter CT, et al. Daclatasvir 30 mg/day is the correct dose for patients taking atazanavir/cobicistat. Velthoven-Graafland K, Drenth JPH, Burger DM. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2017;72(2):486-489. Smookler D, Vanderhoff A, Biondi MJ, et al. Reducing read time of point-of-care test does not affect detection of hepatitis C virus and reduces need for reflex RNA. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020;S1542-3565(20):31068-5. Sobotka LA, Mumtaz K, Wellner MR, et al. Outcomes of Hepatitis C virus seropositive donors to hepatitis C virus seronegative liver recipients: a large single center analysis. Ann Hepatol [Internet]. 2021;24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aohep.2021.100318 Söderholm J, Millbourn C, Büsch K, et al. Higher risk of renal disease in chronic hepatitis C patients: Antiviral therapy survival benefit in patients on hemodialysis. J Hepatol. 2018;68(5):904-911. Solomon SS, Wagner-Cardoso S, Smeaton L, Smeaton L. A minimal monitoring approach for the treatment of hepatitis C virus infection (ACTG A5360 [MINMON]): a phase 4, open-label, single-arm trial. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol [Internet]. 2022;7(4):307-317. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2468-1253(21)00397-6 Sordo L, Barrio G, Bravo MJ, et al. Mortality risk during and after opioid substitution treatment: systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. BMJ. 2017;(357):j1550. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 60 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Soriano V, Barreiro P, deMendoza C. Hypoglycemia in a diabetic patient during hepatitis C therapy. Hepatology. 2016;(63):2065-2066. Soriano V, Benítez-Gutiérrez L, Arias A, et al. Evaluation of sofosbuvir, velpatasvir plus voxilaprevir as fixed-dose co- formulation for treating hepatitis C. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 2017;13(9):1015-1022. Spaulding AC, Weinbaum CM, Lau DT, et al. A framework for management of hepatitis C in prisons. Sterling RK, Seeff LB, Margolis HS, Hoofnagle JH. Ann Intern Med. 2006;144(10):762-769. Spaulding AC, Seals RM, McCallum VA, Perez SD, Brzozowski AK, Steenland NK. Prisoner survival inside and outside of the institution: implications for health-care planning. Am J Epidemiol. 2011;173(5):479-487. Spaulding AC, Thomas DL. Screening for HCV infection in jails. JAMA. 2012;307(12):1259-1260. Spaulding AS, Kim AY, Harzke AJo, et al. Impact of new therapeutics for hepatitis C virus infection in incarcerated populations. Sullivan JC, Linas BP, Brewer A, Dickert J, McGovern BH, Strick LB, et al. Top Antivir Med. 2013;21(1):27-35. Spaulding AC, Sharma A, Messina LC, et al. A comparison of liver disease mortality with HIV and overdose mortality among Georgia prisoners and releasees: a 2-decade cohort study of prisoners incarcerated in 1991. Zlotorzynska M, Miller L, Binswanger IA. Am J Public Health. 2015;105(5):e51-e57. Stein MR, Soloway IJ, Jefferson KS, Roose RJ, Arnsten JH, Litwin AH. Concurrent group treatment for hepatitis C: implementation and outcomes in a methadone maintenance treatment program. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2012;43(4):424-432. Stein BD, Gordon AJ, Dick AW, et al. Supply of buprenorphine waivered physicians: the influence of state policies. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2015;48(1):104-111. Sterling RK, Lissen E, Clumeck N, et al. Development of a simple noninvasive index to predict significant fibrosis in patients with HIV/HCV coinfection. Hepatol. 2006;43(6):1317-1325. Sterling RK, Zeuzem S, Wetzel T, et al. Safety and efficacy of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for the treatment of HCV genotype 1-6: results from the HCV-TARGET study. International Liver Congress. Vienna, Austria; 2019. Stewart ZA, Stern J, NM A, et al. Clinical and financial implications of 2 treatment strategies for donor-derived hepatitis C infections. Transplant Direct [Internet]. 2021;7(10):e762. https://doi.org/10.1097/txd.0000000000001222 Strathdee SA, Latka M, Campbell J, et al. Factors associated with interest in initiating treatment for hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection among young HCV-infected injection drug users. O'Driscoll PT, Golub ET, Kapadia F, Pollini RA, Garfein RS, Thomas DL, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2005;40(Suppl 5):S304-S312. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 61 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Su F, Green PK, Berry K, Ioannou GN. The association between race/ethnicity and the effectiveness of direct antiviral agents for hepatitis C virus infection. Hepatology. 2016;65(2):426-438. Su F, Green PK, Ioannou GN. The Association association between race/ethnicity and the effectiveness of direct antiviral agents for hepatitis C virus infection. Hepatology. 2017;65(2):426-438. Sulkowski MS, Sherman KE, Dieterich D, Bsharat M, Mahnke L, Rockstroh JK, et al. Combination therapy with telaprevir for chronic hepatitis C virus genotype 1 infection in patients with HIV: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159(2):86-96. Sulkowski MS, Naggie S, Lalezari J, et al. Sofosbuvir and ribavirin for hepatitis C in patients with HIV coinfection. Fessel WJ, Mounzer K, Shuhart M, Luetkemeyer AF, Asmuth D, Gaggar A, et al. JAMA. 2014;312(4):353-361. Sulkowski MS, Gardiner DF, Rodriguez-Torres M, et al. Daclatasvir plus sofosbuvir for previously treated or untreated chronic HCV infection. Reddy KR, Hassanein T, Jacobson IM, Lawitz EJ, Lok AS, Hinestrosa F, et al. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(3):211-221. Sulkowski MS, Eron JJ, Wyles DL, Trinh R, Lalezari J, Wang C, et al. Ombitasvir, paritaprevir co-dosed with ritonavir, dasabuvir, and ribavirin for hepatitis C in patients co-infected with HIV-1: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2015;313(12):1223-1231. Sulkowski MS, Hézode C, Gerstoft J, et al. Efficacy and safety of 8 weeks versus 12 weeks of treatment with grazoprevir (MK-5172) and elbasvir (MK-8742) with or without ribavirin in patients with HCV GT1 mono-infection and HIV/HCV coinfection (C-WORTHY): a randomised, open-label phase 2 trial. Vierling JM, Mallolas J, Pol S, Kugelmas M, Murillo A, Weis N, et al. Lancet. 2015;285(9973):1087-1097. Sulkowski MS, Chuang WL, Kao JH, et al. No evidence of reactivation of hepatitis B virus among patients treated with ledipasvir-sofosbuvir for hepatitis C virus infection. Clin Infect Dis. 2016;63(9):1202-1204. Sulkowski M, Cheng WH, Marx S, Y Gonzalez S, Strezewski J, Reau N. Estimating the Year Each State in the United States Will Achieve the World Health Organization's Elimination Targets for Hepatitis C. Adv Ther. 2021;38(1):423-440. Sulkowski M, Telep LE, Colombo M, Durand F, Reddy KR, Lawitz E, et al. Sofosbuvir and risk of estimated glomerular filtration rate decline or end-stage renal disease in patients with renal impairment. Aliment Pharmacol Ther [Internet]. 2022;55(9):1169-1178. https://doi.org/10.1111/apt.16830 Summa V, Ludmerer SW, McCauley JA, et al. MK-5172, a selective inhibitor of hepatitis C virus NS3/4a protease with broad activity across genotypes and resistant variants. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2012;56(8):4161-4167. Suryaprasad AG, White JZ, Xu F. Emerging epidemic of hepatitis C virus infections among young nonurban persons who inject drugs in the United States, 2006–2012. Clin Infect Dis. 2014;(59):1411-1419. Svarovskaia ES, Dvory-Sobol H, Parkin N, et al. Infrequent development of resistance in genotype 1-6 hepatitis C virus- HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 62 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) infected subjects treated with sofosbuvir in phase 2 and 3 clinical trials. Hebner C, Gontcharova V, Martin R, Ouyang W, Han B, Xu S, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2014;59(12):1666-1674. Svoboda J, Andreadis C, Downs LH, Miller WT, Tsai DE, Schuster SJ. Regression of advanced non-splenic marginal zone lymphoma after treatment of hepatitis C virus infection. Leuk Lymphoma. 2005;46(9):1365-1368. Swain MG, Lai MY, Shiffman ML, Cooksley WG, Zeuzem S, Dieterich D, et al. A sustained virologic response is durable in patients with chronic hepatitis C treated with peginterferon alfa-2a and ribavirin. Gastroenterology. 2010;139(5):1593-1601. Tada T, Kurosaki M, Nakamura S, et al. Real-world clinical outcomes of sofosbuvir and velpatasvir treatment in HCV genotype 1- and 2-infected patients with decompensated cirrhosis: A nationwide multicenter study by the Japanese Red Cross Liver Study Group. J Med Virol [Internet]. 2021;93(11):6247-6256. https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.27157 Takahashi K, Nishida N, Kawabata H, Haga H, Chiba T. Regression of Hodgkin lymphoma in response to antiviral therapy for hepatitis C virus infection. Intern Med. 2012;51(19):2745-2747. Takayama H, Sato T, Ikeda F, Ikeda F. Reactivation of hepatitis B virus during interferon-free therapy with daclatasvir and asunaprevir in patient with hepatitis B virus/hepatitis C virus co-infection. Hepatol Res. 2015 Sep 30th ed. 2016;46(5):489-91. Takehara T, Sakamoto N, Nishiguchi S, et al. Efficacy and safety of sofosbuvir-velpatasvir with or without ribavirin in HCV- infected Japanese patients with decompensated cirrhosis: an open-label phase 3 trial. J Gastroenterol. 2019;54(1):87-95. Takikawa H, Yamazaki R, Shoji S, Miyake K, Yamanaka M. Normalization of urinary porphyrin level and disappearance of skin lesions after successful interferon therapy in a case of chronic hepatitis C complicated with porphyria cutanea tarda. J Hepatol. 1995;22(2):249-250. Talal AH, Andrews P, Mcleod A, et al. Integrated, co-located, telemedicine-based treatment approaches for hepatitis C virus (HCV) management in opioid use disorder patients on methadone. Clin Infect Dis. 2019;69(2):323-331. Tan J, Surti B, Saab S. Pregnancy and cirrhosis. Liver Transpl. 2008;14(8):1081-1091. Tang L, Parker A, Flores Y, et al. Treatment of hepatitis C with 8 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir: highly effective in a predominantly black male patient population. J Viral Hepat. 2018;25(2):205-208. Tasillo A, Salomon JA, Trikalinos TA, Horsburgh, Jr CR, Marks SM, Linas BP. Cost-effectiveness of testing and treatment for latent tuberculosis infection in residents born outside the United States with and without medical comorbidities in a simulation model. JAMA Intern Med. 2017;177(12):1755-1764. Tasillo A, Eftekhari-Yazdi G, Nolen S, et al. Short-term effects and long-term cost-effectiveness of universal hepatitis C testing in prenatal care. Obstet Gynecol. 2019;133(2):289-300. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 63 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Tedaldi E, Peters L, Neuhaus J, et al. Opportunistic disease and mortality in patients coinfected with hepatitis B or C virus in the strategic management of antiretroviral therapy (SMART) study. Puoti M, Rockstroh JK, Klein MB, Dore GJ, Mocroft A, Soriano V, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2008;47(11):1468-1475. Terrault NA, Roland ME, Schiano T, Dove L, Wong MT, Poordad F, et al. Outcomes of liver transplant recipients with hepatitis C and human immunodeficiency virus coinfection. Liver Transpl. 2012;18(6):716-726. Terrault NA, Zeuzem S, Di Bisceglie AM, Lim JK, Pockros PJ, Frazier LM, et al. HCV-TARGET study group. Effectiveness of ledipasvir-sofosbuvir combination in patients with hepatitis C virus infection and factors associated with sustained virologic response. Gastroenterology. 2016;151(6):1131-1140.e5. Terrault NA, McCaughan GW, Curry MP, Gane E, Fagiuoli S, Fung JYY, et al. International Liver Transplantation Society consensus statement on hepatitis C management in liver transplant candidates. Transplantation. 2017;101(5):945-955. Terrault NA, Lok ASF, McMahon BJ, et al. Update on prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of chronic hepatitis B: AASLD 2018 hepatitis B guidance. Hepatology. 2018;67(4):1560‐1599. Terrault NA, Burton J, Ghobrial M, et al. Prospective multicenter study of early antiviral therapy in liver and kidney transplant recipients of HCV-viremic donors. Hepatology. 2020;. Thein HH, Yi Q, Dore GJ, Krahn MD. Natural history of hepatitis C virus infection in HIV-infected individuals and the impact of HIV in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy: a meta-analysis. AIDS. 2008;22(15):1979-1991. Thomas DL, Villano SA, Riester KA, Hershow R, Mofenson LM, Landesman SH, et al. Perinatal transmission of hepatitis C virus from human immunodeficiency virus type 1-infected mothers. Women and infants transmission study. J Infect Dis. 1998;177(6):1480-1488. Thomas DL. The challenge of hepatitis C in the HIV-infected person. Annu. Rev. Med. 2008;59:473-485. Thompson A, Zeuzem S, Rockstroh JK, Kwo PY, Roth D, Lawitz EJ, et al. The combination of grazoprevir and elbasvir +RBV is highly effective for the treatment of GT1a-infected patients. The Liver Meeting 2015. San Francisco, CA; 2015. Thorpe J, Saeed S, Moodie EE, Klein MB. Antiretroviral treatment interruption leads to progression of liver fibrosis in HIV- hepatitis C virus co-infection. AIDS. 2011;25(7):967-975. Tice JA, Chahal HS, Ollendorf DA. Comparative clinical effectiveness and value of novel interferon-free combination therapy for hepatitis C genotype 1 summary of California technology assessment forum report. JAMA Intern Med. 2015;175(9):1559-1560. Tieu HV, Laeyendecker O, Nandi V, et al. Prevalence and mapping of hepatitis C infections among men who have sex with men in New York City. PLoS One. 2018;:13:e0200269. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 64 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Todesco E, Day N, Amiel C, et al. High clustering of acute HCV infections and high rate of associated STIs among Parisian HIV-positive male patients. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2019;53(5):678-681. Torgersen J, Newcomb CW, Carbonari DM, et al. Protease inhibitor-based direct-acting antivirals are associated with increased risk of aminotransferase elevations but not hepatic dysfunction or decompensation. J Hepatol [Internet]. 2021;75(6):1312-1322. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2021.07.021 Torres HA, Mahale P. Most patients with HCV-associated lymphoma present with mild liver disease: a call to revise antiviral treatment prioritization. Liver Int. 2015;35(6):1661-1664. Torres HA, Hosry J, Mahale P, Economides MP, Jiang Y, Lok AS. Hepatitis C virus reactivation in patients receiving cancer treatment: a prospective observational study. Hepatology. 2017;67(1):36-47. Torres HA, Hosry J, Mahale P, Economides MP, Jiang Y, Lok AS. Hepatitis C virus reactivation in patients receiving cancer treatment: A prospective observational study. Hepatology. 2018;67(1):36-47. Trooskin SB, Poceta J, Towey CM, Yolken A, Rose JS, Luqman NL, et al. Results from a geographically focused, community-based HCV screening, linkage-to-care and patient navigation program. J Gen Intern Med. 2015;30(7):950-957. Trudeau S, Mendiratta V, Dababneh Y, Hollingsworth J, Gordon SC. Letter to the Editor: Successful treatment of multidrug resistant hepatitis C after >12 months of continuous therapy with direct-acting antivirals. Hepatology. 2022;. Turner SS, Gianella S, Yip MJ-S, van Seggelen WO, Gillies RD, Foster AL, et al. Shedding of hepatitis C virus in semen of human immunodeficiency virus-infected men. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2016;3(2). Tyson GL, Kramer JR, Duan Z, Davila JA, Richardson PA, El-Serag HB. Prevalence and predictors of hepatitis B virus coinfection in a United States cohort of hepatitis C virus-infected patients. Hepatology. 2013;58(2):538-545. Ueda Y, Kobayashi T, Ikegami T, et al. Efficacy and safety of glecaprevir and pibrentasvir treatment for 8 or 12 weeks in patients with recurrent hepatitis C after liver transplantation: a Japanese multicenter experience. J Gastroenterol. 2019;54(7):660-666. Urbanus AT, van de Laar TJ, Stolte IG, Schinkel J, Heijman T, Coutinho RA, et al. Hepatitis C virus infections among HIV- infected men who have sex with men: an expanding epidemic. AIDS. 2009;23(12):F1-F7. Prescription drug pricing in the private sector. 2015. US GAO. An overview of approaches to negotiate drug prices used by other countries and US private payers and dederal programs [Internet]. 2015. http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-07-358T HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 65 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) US Senate Committee on Finance. The price of Sovaldi and its impact on the US health care system. 2016. US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for hepatitis C virus infection in adults: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. 2013. van de Laar TJW, van der Bij AK, Prins M, Bruisten SM, Brinkman K, Ruys TA, et al. Increase in HCV incidence among men who have sex with men in Amsterdam most likely caused by sexual transmission. J Infect Dis. 2007;196(2):230-238. van de Laar T, Pybus O, Bruisten S, Brown D, Nelson M, Bhagani S, et al. Evidence of a large, international network of HCV transmission in HIV-positive men who have sex with men. Gastroenterology. 2009;136(5):1609-1617. van de Laar TJ, Matthews GV, Prins M, Danta M. Acute hepatitis C in HIV-infected men who have sex with men: an emerging sexually transmitted infection. AIDS. 2010;24(12):1799-1812. van der Meer AJ, Veldt BJ, Feld JJ, Wedemeyer H, Dufour JF, Lammert F, et al. Association between sustained virological response and all-cause mortality among patients with chronic hepatitis C and advanced hepatic fibrosis. JAMA. 2012;308(24):2584-2593. vanTilborg M, Al-Marzooqi SH, Wong WWL. HCV core antigen as an alternative to HCV RNA testing in the era of direct- acting antivirals: retrospective screening and diagnostic cohort studies. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2018;3(12):856-864. Vanhommerig JW, Lambers FA, Schinkel J, Geskus RB, Arends JE, van de Laar TJ, et al. Risk factors for sexual transmission of hepatitis C virus among human immunodeficiency virus-infected men who have sex with men: a case- control study. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2015;2(3):ofv115. Varan AK, Mercer DW, Stein MS, Spaulding AC. Hepatitis C seroprevalence among prison inmates since 2001: still high but declining. Public Health Rep. 2014;129(2):187-195. Vaux S, Chevaliez S, Saboni L, et al. Prevalence of hepatitis C infection, screening and associated factors among men who have sex with men attending gay venues: a cross-sectional survey (PREVAGAY), France, 2015. BMC Infect Dis. 2019;19:315. Vega AD, Hynicka LM, Claeys K, Chua JV, Heil EL. Effectiveness of 8 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir for hepatitis C in HCV-HIV-coinfected patients. Antivir Ther. 2019;24(1):11-17. Veldt BJ, Heathcote EJ, Wedemeyer H, Reichen J, Hofmann WP, Zeuzem S, et al. Sustained virologic response and clinical outcomes in patients with chronic hepatitis C and advanced fibrosis. Ann Intern Med. 2007;147(10):677-684. Vermeersch P, Van RM, Lagrou K. Validation of a strategy for HCV antibody testing with two enzyme immunoassays in a routine clinical laboratory. J Clin Virol. 2008;42(4):394-398. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 66 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Verna EC, Morelli G, Terrault NA, et al. DAA therapy and long-term hepatic function in advanced/decompensated cirrhosis: real-world experience from HCV-TARGET cohort. J Hepatol. 2020;S0168-8278(20):30193-30198. Villano SA, Vlahov D, Nelson KE, Cohn S, Thomas DL. Persistence of viremia and the importance of long-term follow-up after acute hepatitis C infection. Hepatology. 1999;29(3):908-914. Volk JE, Marcus JL, Phengrasamy T, et al. No new HIV Infections with increasing use of HIV preexposure prophylaxis in a clinical practice setting. Clin Infect Dis. 2015;61(10):1601-1603. Volkow ND, Frieden TR, Hyde PS, Cha SS. Medication-assisted therapies--tackling the opioid-overdose epidemic. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(22):2063-2066. Volkow ND, Collins FS. The role of science in addressing the opioid crisis. N Engl J Med. 2017;377(4):391-394. vonFelden J, Vermehren J, Ingiliz P, et al. High efficacy of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir and impact of baseline resistance- associated substitutions in hepatitis C genotype 3 infection. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2018;47(9):1288-1295. Wai CT, Greenson JK, Fontana RJ, Kalbfleisch JD, Marrero JA, Conjeevaram HS, et al. A simple noninvasive index can predict both significant fibrosis and cirrhosis in patients with chronic hepatitis C. Hepatology. 2003;38(2):518-526. Waked I, Shiha G, Qadish RB. Ombitasvir, paritaprevir, and ritonavir plus ribavirin for chronic hepatitis C virus genotype 4 infection in Egyptian patients with or without compensated cirrhosis (AGATE-II): a multicentre, phase 3, partly randomised open-label trial. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016;1(1):36-44. Walley AY, Xuan Z, Hackman HH, et al. Opioid overdose rates and implementation of overdose education and nasal naloxone distribution in Massachusetts: interrupted time series analysis. BMJ. 2013;346:f174. Wandeler G, Gsponer T, Bregenzer A, Gunthard HF, Clerc O, Calmy A, et al. Hepatitis C virus infections in the Swiss HIV cohort study: a rapidly evolving epidemic. Clin Infect Dis. 2012;55(10):1408-1416. Wang C, Jia L, O'Boyle DR, Sun JH, Rigat K, Valera L, et al. Comparison of daclatasvir resistance barriers on NS5A from hepatitis C virus genotypes 1 to 6: implications for cross-genotype activity. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014;58(9):5155-5163. Wang C, Chen J, Ji D, et al. Hepatitis due to reactivation of hepatitis B virus in endemic areas among patients with hepatitis C treated with direct-acting antiviral agents. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016;15(1):132-136. Ward J, Hall W, Mattick RP. Role of maintenance treatment in opioid dependence. The Lancet. 1999;353(9148):221-226. Ward KM, Falade-Nwulia O, Moon J. Randomized controlled trial of cash incentives or peer mentors to improve HCV linkage and treatment among HIV/HCV coinfected persons who inject drugs: the CHAMPS Study. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2019;6(4):ofz166. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 67 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Waruingi W, Mhanna MJ, Kumar D, Abughali N. Hepatitis C virus universal screening versus risk based selective screening during pregnancy. J Neonatal Perinatal Med. 2015;8(4):371-378. Watts T, Stockman L, Martin J, Guilfoyle S, Vergeront JM. Increased risk for mother-to-infant transmission of hepatitis C virus among Medicaid recipients - Wisconsin, 2011-2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2017;66(42):1136-1139. Waziry R, Hajarizadeh B, Grebely J, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma risk following direct-acting antiviral HCV therapy: a systematic review, meta-analyses, and meta-regression. J Hepatol. 2017;67(6):1204-1212. Wedemeyer H, Duberg AS, Buti M, Rosenberg WM, Frankova S, Esmat GE, et al. Strategies to manage hepatitis C virus (HCV) disease burden. J Viral Hepat. 2014;21(Suppl 1):60-89. Wei L, Lim SG, Xie Q, et al. Sofosbuvir-velpatasvir for treatment of chronic hepatitis C virus infection in Asia: a single-arm, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2019;4(2):127-134. Weinbaum C, Lyerla R, Margolis HS, Margolis HS. Prevention and control of infections with hepatitis viruses in correctional settings. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2003;52(RR-1):1-36. Weinbaum CM, Williams IT, Mast EE, Mast EE. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Recommendations for identification and public health management of persons with chronic hepatitis B virus infection. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2008;57(RR-8):1-20. Weiss RD, Potter JS, Fiellin DA, Byrne M, et al. Adjunctive counseling during brief and extended buprenorphine-naloxone treatment for prescription opioid dependence: a 2-phase randomized controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2011;68(12):1238-1246. Welzel TM, Petersen J, Herzer K, et al. Daclatasvir plus sofosbuvir, with or without ribavirin, achieved high sustained virological response rates in patients with HCV infection and advanced liver disease in a real-world cohort. Gut. 2016;65(11):1861-1870. Welzel TM, Zeuzem S, Petersen J, et al. Safety and efficacy of daclatasvir plus sofosbuvir with or without ribavirin for the treatment of chronic HCV genotype 3 infection: interim results of a multicenter European compassionate use program [abstract 37]. In Presented at the Liver Meeting 2016. San Francisco, CA; 2016. Welzel TM, Zeuzem S, Dumas EO, et al. GARNET: high SVR rates following eight-week treatment with ombitasvir/paritaprevir/ritonavir + dasabuvir for patients with HCV genotype 1b infection [abstract 163]. New Perspectives in Hepatitis C Virus Infection - The Roadmap for Cure, September 23-24, 2016. Paris, France; 2016. Wermeling DP. Review of naloxone safety for opioid overdose: practical considerations for new technology and expanded public access. Ther Adv Drug Saf. 2015;6(1):20-31. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 68 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Westin J, Lagging LM, Spak F, Aires N, Svensson E, Lindh M, et al. Moderate alcohol intake increases fibrosis progression in untreated patients with hepatitis C virus infection. J Viral Hepat. 2002;9(3):235-241. White DL, Ratziu V, El-Serag HB. Hepatitis C infection and risk of diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Hepatol. 2008;49(5):831-844. Whitlock EP, Polen MR, Green CA, Orleans T, Klein J. Behavioral counseling interventions in primary care to reduce risky/harmful alcohol use by adults: a summary of the evidence for the US Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2004;140(7):557-568. WHO Guidelines for the screening, care and treatment of persons with chronic hepatitis C infection. 2016 p. 138. Wijarnpreecha K, Thongprayoon C, Sanguankeo A, Upala S, Ungprasert P, Cheungpasitporn W. Hepatitis C infection and intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol. 2017;41(1):39-45. Wilder JM, Jeffers LJ, Ravendhran N, et al. Safety and efficacy of ledipasvir-sofosbuvir in black patients with hepatitis C virus infection: a retrospective analysis of phase 3 data. Hepatology. 2016;63(2):437-444. Wiley TE, McCarthy M, Breidi L, McCarthy M, Layden TJ. Impact of alcohol on the histological and clinical progression of hepatitis C infection. Hepatology. 1998;28(3):805-809. Williams IT, Bell BP, Kuhnert W, Alter MJ. Incidence and transmission patterns of acute hepatitis C in the United States, 1982-2006. Arch Intern Med. 2011;171(3):242-248. Wilson E, Covert E, Hoffman J, et al. A pilot study of safety and efficacy of HCV retreatment with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir in patients with or without HIV (RESOLVE study). J Hepatol. 2019;71(3):498-504. Wirth S, Rosenthal P, Gonzalez-Peralta RP, et al. Sofosbuvir and ribavirin in adolescents 12-17 years old with hepatitis C virus genotype 2 or 3 infection. Hepatology. 2017;66(4):1102-1110. Witt MD, Seaberg EC, Darilay A, Young S, Badri S, Rinaldo CR, et al. Incident hepatitis C virus infection in men who have sex with men: a prospective cohort analysis, 1984-2011. Clin Infect Dis. 2013;57(1):77-84. Wohl DA, Allmon AG, Evon D. Financial incentives for adherence to hepatitis C virus clinical care and treatment: a randomized trial of two strategies. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2017;4(2):ofx095. Wong KA, Worth A, Martin R, Svarovskaia ES, Brainard DM, Lawitz EJ, et al. Characterization of Hepatitis C virus resistance from a multiple-dose clinical trial of the novel NS5A inhibitor GS-5885. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013;57(12):6333-6340. Wong RJ, Nguyen MT, Trinh HN, et al. Community-based real-world treatment outcomes of sofosbuvir/ledipasvir in HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 69 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Asians with chronic hepatitis C virus genotype 6 in the US. J Viral Hepatitis. 2017;24(1):17-21. Wong JB, Cohen JT. Cost-effective but bad for health? Hepatitis C treatment, moral hazard, and opportunity cost. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017;15(6):838-840. Wong YJ, Thurairajah PH, Kumar R, et al. Efficacy and safety of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir in a real-world chronic hepatitis C genotype 3 cohort. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2021;36(5):1300-1308. Woolley AE, Singh SK, Goldberg HJ, et al. Heart and lung transplants from HCV-infected donors to uninfected recipients. N Engl J Med. 2019;380(17):1606-1617. Wu DB, Jiang W, Wang YH, et al. Safety and efficacy of sofosbuvir-based direct-acting antiviral regimens for hepatitis C virus genotype 6 in Southwest China: Real-world experience of a retrospective study. J Viral Hepat. 2019;26(3):316-322. Wyles DL, Ruane PJ, Sulkowski MS, Dieterich D, Luetkemeyer A, Morgan TR, et al. Daclatasvir plus sofosbuvir for HCV in patients coinfected with HIV-1. N Engl J Med. 2015;373(8):714-725. Wyles DL, Pockros P, Morelli G, Younes Z, Svarovskaia ES, Yang JC, et al. Ledipasvir-sofosbuvir plus ribavirin for patients with genotype 1 hepatitis C virus previously treated in clinical trials of sofosbuvir regimens. Hepatology. 2015;61(6):1793-1797. Wyles DL, Brau N, Kottilil S, et al. Sofosbuvir/Velpatasvir Fixed Dose Combination for 12 Weeks in Patients Co-infected with HCV and HIV-1: The Phase 3 ASTRAL-5 Study Abstract PS104. In International Liver Congress 2016. April 13-17. Barcelona, Spain; 2016. Wyles D, Mangia A, Cheng W, Shafran S, Schwabe C, Ouyang W, et al. Long-term persistence of HCV NS5A resistance associated substitutions after treatment with the HCV NS5A inhibitor, ledipasvir, without sofosbuvir [Epub ahead of print]. Antiviral Therapy. 2017;. Wyles D, Bräu N, Kottilil S, Daar ES, Ruane P, Workowski K, et al.. Sofosbuvir and velpatasvir for the treatment of HCV in patients coinfected with HIV-1: an open-label, phase 3 study. Clin Infect Dis. 2017;65(1):6-12. Wyles D, Poordad F, Wang S, Alric L, Felizarta F, Kwo PY, et al. Glecaprevir/pibrentasvir for hepatitis C virus genotype 3 patients with cirrhosis and/or prior treatment experience: a partially randomized phase 3 clinical trial: viral hepatitis. Hepatology. 2018;67(2):514-523. Wyles DL, Mangia A, Cheng W, et al. Long-term persistence of HCV NS5A resistance associated substitutions after treatment with the HCV NS5A inhibitor, ledipasvir, without sofosbuvir. Antivir Ther. 2018;23(3):229-238. Wyles D, Weiland O, Yao B, et al. Retreatment of patients who failed glecaprevir/pibrentasvir treatment for hepatitis C virus infection. J Hepatol. 2019;70(5):1019-1023. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 70 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Yao BB, Fredrick LM, Schnell G, et al. Efficacy and safety of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir in patients with HCV genotype 5/6: an integrated analysis of phase 2/3 studies. Liver Int. 2020;. Yattoo GN. Treatment of chronic hepatitis C with ledipasvir/sofosbuvir combination during pregnancy [Abstract]. Hepatol Int. 2018;12(Suppl. 2):S292-S293. Yeh WW, Feng HP, Auger P, et al. Drug-drug interactions with grazoprevir/elbasvir: practical considerations for the care of HIV/HCV coinfected patients [abstract 63]. Presented at the International Workshop on Clinical Pharmacology of HIV and Hepatitis Therapy; Washington, DC; May 26-28, 2015. Yehia BR, Schranz AJ, Umscheid CA, Lo Re, V 3rd. The treatment cascade for chronic hepatitis C virus infection in the United States: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2014;9(7):e101554. Yeung LT, To T, King SM, Roberts EA. Spontaneous clearance of childhood hepatitis C virus infection. J Viral Hepat. 2007;14:797-805. Yoneda M, Saito S, Ikeda T, Fujita K, Mawatari H, Kirikoshi H, et al. Hepatitis C virus directly associates with insulin resistance independent of the visceral fat area in nonobese and nondiabetic patients. J Viral Hepat. 2007;14(9):600-607. Yoshida EM, Kwo P, Agarwal K, Duvoux C, Durand F, Peck-Radosavljevic M, et al. Persistence of virologic response after liver transplant in hepatitis C patients treated with ledipasvir/sofosbuvir plus ribavirin pretransplant. Ann Hepatol. 2017;16(3):375-381. Younossi ZM, Zheng L, Stepanova M, Venkatesan C, Mir HM. Moderate, excessive or heavy alcohol consumption: each is significantly associated with increased mortality in patients with chronic hepatitis C. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2013;37(7):703-709. Younossi ZM, Stepanova M, Nader F, Jacobson IM, Gane EJ, Nelson DR, et al. Patient-reported outcomes in chronic hepatitis C patients with cirrhosis treated with sofosbuvir-containing regimens. Hepatology. 2014;59(6):2161-2169. Younossi ZM, Stepanova M, Henry L, Gane EJ, Jacobson IM, Lawitz EJ, et al. Effects of sofosbuvir-based treatment, with and without interferon, on outcome and productivity of patients with chronic hepatitis C. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014;12(8):1349-1359. Younossi ZM, Park H, Saab S, Ahmed A, Dieterich D, Gordon SC. Cost-effectiveness of all-oral ledipasvir/sofosbuvir regimens in patients with chronic hepatitis C virus genotype 1 infection. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2015;41(6):544-563. Younossi ZM, Jiang Y, Smith NJ, Stepanova M, Beckerman R. Ledipasvir/sofosbuvir regimens for chronic hepatitis C infection: Insights from a work productivity economic model from the United States. Hepatology. 2015;61(5):1471-1478. Younossi ZM, Stepanova M, Afdhal NH, Kowdley KV, Zeuzem S, Henry L, et al. Improvement of health-related quality of life and work productivity in chronic hepatitis C patients with early and advanced fibrosis treated with ledipasvir and sofosbuvir. J Hepatol. 2015;63(2):337-345. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 71 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Younossi ZM, Stepanova M, Sulkowski MS, Naggie S, Puoti M, Orkin C, et al. Sofosbuvir and ribavirin for treatment of chronic hepatitis C in patients coinfected with hepatitis C virus and HIV: the impact on patient-reported outcomes. J Infect Dis. 2015;212(3):367-377. Younossi ZM, Stepanova M, Feld J, Zeuzem S, Jacobson I, Agarwal K, et al. Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir improves patient- reported outcomes in HCV patients: results from ASTRAL-1 placebo-controlled trial. J Hepatol. 2016;65(1):33-39. Younossi ZM, Stepanova M, Henry L, Nader F, Hunt S. An in-depth analysis of patient-reported outcomes in patients with chronic hepatitis C treated with different anti-viral regimens. Am J Gastroenterol. 2016;111(6):808-816. Younossi ZM, Stepanova M, Jacobson I. Not achieving sustained viral eradication of hepatitis C virus after treatment leads to worsening of patient-reported outcomes. Clin Infect Dis. 2019;:pii: ciz243. Zahnd C, Salazar-Vizcaya LP, Dufour JF, Mullhaupt B, Wandeler G, Kouyos R, et al. Impact of deferring HCV treatment on liver-related events in HIV+ patients. In Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections (CROI) February 23-26. Seattle, WA; 2015. Zahnd C, Salazar-Vizcaya LP, Dufour JF, et al. Modelling the impact of deferring HCV treatment on liver-related complications in HIV coinfected men who have sex with men. J Hepatol. 2016;65(1):26-32. Zarski JP, Bohn B, Bastie A, Pawlotsky JM, Baud M, Bost-Bezeaux F, et al. Characteristics of patients with dual infection by hepatitis B and C viruses. J Hepatol. 1998;28(1):27-33. Zelenev A, Mazhnaya A, Basu S, Altice FL. Hepatitis C virus treatment as prevention in an extended network of people who inject drugs in the USA: a modelling study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2018;18(2):215-224. Merck & Co. Inc. Zepatier Package insert. Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp; 2019. Zeuzem S, Jacobson IM, Baykal T, Marinho RT, Poordad F, Bourliere M, et al. Retreatment of HCV with ABT-450/r- ombitasvir and dasabuvir with ribavirin. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(17):1604-1614. Zeuzem S, Dusheiko GM, Salupere R, et al. Sofosbuvir and ribavirin in HCV genotypes 2 and 3. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:1993-2001. Zeuzem S, Ghalib R, K. Reddy R, Pockros PJ, Ben Ari, iv Z, Zhao Y, et al. Grazoprevir-elbasvir combination therapy for treatment-naive cirrhotic and noncirrhotic patients with chronic hepatitis C virus genotype 1, 4, or 6 infection: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2015;163(1):1-13. Zeuzem S, Rockstroh JK, Kwo PY, et al. Predictors of response to grazoprevir/elbasvir among HCV genotype 1 (GT1)–infected patients: integrated analysis of phase 2-3 trials [abstract 700]. In Liver Meeting 2015. San Francisco, CA; 2015. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 72 of 73 HCV Guidance References Published on HCV Guidance (https://www.hcvguidelines.org) Zeuzem S, Ghalib R, Reddy KR, Pockros PJ, Ari ZB, Zhao Y, et al. Grazoprevir-Elbasvir Combination Therapy for Treatment-Naive Cirrhotic and Noncirrhotic Patients With Chronic Hepatitis C Virus Genotype 1, 4, or 6 Infection: A Randomized Trial. Ann Intern Med. 2015;163(1):1-13. Zeuzem S, Feld J, Wang S. ENDURANCE-1: efficacy and safety of 8- versus 12-week treatment with ABT-493/ABT-530 in patients with chronic HCV genotype 1 infection [abstract 253]. In The Liver Meeting 2016. Boston, MA; 2016. Zeuzem S, Mizokami M, Pianko S, Mangia A, Han KH, Martin R, et al. NS5A resistance-associated substitutions in patients with genotype 1 hepatitis C virus: prevalence and effect on treatment outcome. J Hepatol. 2017;66(5):910-918. Zeuzem S, Foster GR, Wang S, et al. Glecaprevir-pibrentasvir for 8 or 12 weeks in HCV genotype 1 or 3 Infection. N Engl J Med [Internet]. 2018;378(4):354-369. https://doi.org/10.1056/nejmoa1702417 Zibbell JE, Asher AK, Patel RC, et al. Increases in acute hepatitis C virus infection related to a growing opioid epidemic and associated injection drug use, United States, 2004 to 2014. Am J Public Health. 2018;108(2):175-181. Ziol M, Handra-Luca A, Kettaneh A, Christidis C, Mal F, Kazemi F, et al. Noninvasive assessment of liver fibrosis by measurement of stiffness in patients with chronic hepatitis C. Hepatology. 2005;41(1):48-54. Zuckerman E, Ashkenasi E, Kovaleve Y, et al. The real world Israeli experience of treating chronic hepatitis C genotype 1 patients with advanced fibrosis with parataprevir/ ritonavir/ ombitasvir, dasabuvir with or without ribavirin: a large, multi- center cohort. J Hepatology. 2016;64(2):S137. Øvrehus ALH, Blach S, Christensen PB, Gerstoft J, Weis N, Krarup H, et al.. Impact of prioritizing treatment in a high resource setting - minimizing the burden of HCV related disease in 15 years [P074]. J Hepatol. 2015;62(Suppl 2):S591-S592. HCV Guidance: Recommendations for Testing, Managing, and Treating Hepatitis C | © 2014-2023 AASLD and IDSA v2023.1 Page 73 of 73